You'd better be quiet.
Oh, good sir, I am.
Dear lady
Why are you crying?
Whose tongue?
Let's hear it.
What a spoiled pet! If she knew what she was doing, she would have put on a show of weeping.
I thought that he'd been killed by a bolt of lightning. But arent you drowned, Stephano? I hope now that youre not drowned. Is the storm over? I hid under this dead monsters cloak because I was afraid of the storm. Are you actually alive, Stephano? Oh, Stephano, two of us from Naples survived the shipwreck![TRINCULO grabs STEPHANO and dances him around]
[To himself] Too far, too far! Friendships that get too close always end with the "friends" having sex. I'm having a heart attack. My heart is racing, but not with excitementdefinitely not. They might as well be relaxed and open with each other here at the party, and blame it on the plentiful food and drink. But holding hands and linking fingers, and smiling stupidly at each other and sighing as if they were having an orgasmthat kind of "party" hurts my heart and my head.[To MAMILLIUS] Mamillius, are you my son?
Give us the facts, give us the factstell us something about him.
I'm not eating dinner at home tomorrow. I'm meeting the captains at the castle.
That's likely, since I'm staying for lunch there.
Please, continue. Theres something in your face and eyes that indicates you're talking about something serious, and thatlike giving birthyou're finding it hard to actually get it out.
You who are more beautiful than words can say, give me some time and let me explain myself.
You keep pushing these words into my ears that I dont have any desire to hear. If only I had never sent my daughter to Tunis to be married! I lost my son because of it. And, as far as I'm concerned, I lost my daughter too, since she is now living so far from Italy that I'll never see her again. Oh, my dear son and heir of Naples and Milan, what strange fish has eaten your dead body?
To do that is within the scope of a man's ability. And therefore I'll give it a try.
May God grant him health. Did you speak with him?
That man makes me feel a lot more confident. It seems to me that he doesnt look like hes fated to die by drowning. Instead he looks like hes destined to die by hanging. Good Fate, hold strong, and make sure that man survives this storm so that one day he can hanged. May the rope fated to hold him by the neck save us, because the ropes we have on the ship dont seem to be helping us much. If hes not fated to be hanged, then things look bleak for us.
[Seeing ROMEOs body] Oh, you rude boy! What terrible manners to die before your father.
No, in their lives they were opposed by bad friends.
Goodbye, Thaliard!
What is it, noble man?
Where are you going?
The most delicate I've ever smelled. Lift up the lid! Oh, you powerful gods! What's in here? [He looks in] A body!
Just if some trinket should catch your eye and you want to buy itI have the feeling that your store of money isn't large enough for useless purchases.
And no doubt Petruchio will have a quiet catchno one's going to fight him for her. But now, Baptista, let's think about your younger daughter. This is the day we've been waiting for. I am your neighbor, and I was her first suitor.
So what?
Well, may you have good fortune, good Petruchio! You've won the bet, and I'll add twenty thousand crowns to these two men's losses. It will be a new dowry for a new daughter, for indeed she is so changed that she's like a whole new woman.
And mine.
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, your conscience will fly out.
Don't despair, madam.
[To OTHELLO] You must leave this room and come with us. You have been stripped of your power and command, and Cassio now rules over Cyprus. As for this scoundrel, he will get whatever clever, cruel torture we can devise to cause him a lot of pain for a long time. You will stay a prisoner until the Venetian government hears of your crime. Come on, bring him away.
Is it anything less than my death?
Rise with the lark at dawn tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
I didnt see anybody use you for pleasure. If I had, Id have quickly pulled out my weapon, I assure you. I draw my sword as quickly as any other man if I see a good fight brewing and the law is on my side.
The same that I do right now: hate a lord with all my heart.
My name is Marina.
. . . to have a foolish wife.
No, sir.
What's going on? What's the news from her?
You are a fool. Get out of here.
No, my good lord. Don't distrust me.
Dismiss me?
Yes, I intend to go.
I would take on any fighteven a deadly onejust for one loving glance! Oh, it's still proved true that love's curse is a woman who cannot reciprocate love.
I am sorry, madam. I've hurt your relative, but I would've had to do the same thing even to my own brother, for I was acting in self-defense. You're looking at me like I'm a stranger, so I can tell that I've offended you. Forgive me, sweet one, for the sake of the vows we made to each other so recently.
What is your name?
What's going on, Malvolio?
Goodbye, Andronicus; Revenge is going now to lay a plot against your enemies.
[To the servants] Perfect, perfect. Give me the fire and the clothes. Play some sad music, please! Play that violin, you lazy man! Music, please, give her some music. [The servants begin to play while Cerimon uses various medicines and potions on THAISA][To the GENTLEMEN] Gentlemen. The queen will live. Look, she's waking up! She's warm! She's been asleep for about five hours, but look how she comes back to life!
Yes. And in reply she says thanks, but no thanks. I wish this fool were married to her grave!
No, please. I won't take your servant from you.
But did she receive my dog?
Not her either.
I ask you to spare the life of my servant, who just today killed a rowdy gentleman that used to serve the Duke of Norfolk.
It's impossible. Who would take your place and be Vincentio's son here in Padua, living in your house and studying your books, welcoming your friends, visiting and dining with your fellow countrymen from Pisa?
I wish I could be as sure of a good dinner.
Hey, good lieutenant! No, gentlemen! Hey, help! Lieutenantsir MontanoGentlemen, help!Some fine guards these guys are.
My beautiful Perdita! But we're in a sticky situation. Camillo, you've rescued my father and now me; you're a life-saver. What should we do? I don't have the clothes and facilities I normally travel with as the prince of Bohemia, and I won't be able to get those things in Sicily.
You, that man, and you the other, each of you still in the company of the other. Each of you is single and alone when apart from the other, but now an enemy keeps you company.[To one of the men] If you promise to rid the world of villains, do not go near the other guy.[To the other] If you swear you will not stand where one villain is, abandon him.[To both] So go away! Here's the gold you came for, you slaves.
Let him sink there, so the seas will be on him! The cowardly rebel, what is he doing there?
My daughter is a young girl who has never been bold. She is so still and quiet and naturally inclined to blushing. Is it possible that she, in spite of her nature, in spite of her young age, in spite of her nationality, in spite of her reputationin spite of everythingwould fall in love with something she feared to even look at? It would be a foolish misjudgment to think that my perfect daughter could make such a mistake, contrary to all rules of nature. We must find out what cunning evil plots have brought this about. Therefore I say again that he has used some potion on her that affects the blood, or some drug magically enchanted for his purpose.
I said something like that, but I only said what I thought might be true.
[To himself] I know who they are, although they think Im crazy. Ill beat them at their own game, this pair of cursed hell-dogs and their mother!
[To PERICLES] Except for you; you're my guest. Here's a victory crown so everyone know's you're the king of the feast.
Tut, tut, you've grown icy. Your kindness freezes over. Tell me, do you agree that they must die?
Do you like this jewel, Apemantus?
As soon as Antonio got the hang of how to grant some requests while denying others, of figuring out which people to promote and which to hold back in order to stop them from getting too powerful, he was able to steal the people who used to be mine. He changed them, or, you might say, remade them completely. Having power over both the government and all the people in the government, he could make everyone say or do whatever he wanted them to. He was like ivy growing up a tree, and I was like the treehe covered me entirely until I was hidden, and sucked my vitality out of me. Youre not listening.
Would your Lordship like to drink a cup of Spanish wine?
Don't worry about how I'll handle myself.
Hide under the yew-trees over there, and put your ear against the ground so that youll hear anyone walking through the graveyard. If you hear someone approach, signal me with a whistle. Give me those flowers. Do as I tell you. Go.
Would you speak on behalf of the Duke of Hereford? If it be so, come out with it boldly, man; I'm eager to hear those who speak good of him.
Oh God, no! God forbid it!
I'm performing the violent tragedy of my life. Edwardmy husband, your son, our kingis dead. Why should we keep living when our leader and lifeblood is gone? How can the branches keep growing when the root is gone? Why aren't the leaves withering now that the sap is dried up? If you will live, then lament. If you will die, then be quick about it, so our swift-winged souls might catch up with the king'sor at least follow him, like obedient subjects, into his new kingdom of never-ending night.
Or stole it, rather.
[Seeing them] But wait, there's more work to be done. Every street, store, church, meeting, and funeral can turn into an opportunity if you're savvy.
Yes, and all we need to do is name the day.
I'll only irritate you if I stay. Let me go.
No, stay. You should be honest.
That same villain, Romeo.
Great God of heaven, say amen to all of this! But tell me, is young George Stanley still alive?
Alive and triumphant, while Mercutio is dead? Begone, respect and compassion. Rage and fury will be my guide. Now, Tybalt, take back the villain that you called me earlier. Mercutios soul is waiting just a bit above our heads for you to join him. Either you, I, or both of us must go with him.
Thats how it it goes with love. My own sadness is a heavy weight on my chest, and now youre going to add your own sadness to mine. The love you are showing me is only increasing my grief. Love is like a smoke made out of the sighs of lovers. When the smoke clears, love is a fire burning in the lovers' eyes. But if that love is thwarted, then it is a sea made out of lovers' tears. What else is love? A wise madness. A sweet candy that makes you choke. Goodbye, my cousin.
Hello, many-colored messenger, who never disobeys Juno, the wife of Jupiter. With your golden wings you scatter dewdropsthose refreshing showerson my flowers. You crown my woodlands and fields with each end of your rainbow, making a gorgeous scarf for my delighted earth. Why has your queen summoned me here to this grassy place?
It's always like this before times of great change. By some divine instinct, we get nervous when danger is comingjust like when we see the waves swelling before a storm arrives. But leave it all to God. Where are you off to?
Stop talking and go after her!
Yes, a most unhappy one. I would do anything to repair their friendship, because of my love for Cassio.
Mine too. Do you hear what I'm saying, monster? If I become unhappy with you, be careful
Well, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old jacket, a pair of old pants turned inside out, broken suspenders holding them up, and a pair of boots that have been used as candle holders: one of them buckled, the other laced. He has an old rusty sword from the town armory with a broken hilt and no scabbard. He's riding on a lame horse with an old moth-eaten saddle and two different stirrups, and the horse has swollen glands, a mouth infection, tumors, leg boils, diseased feet, jaundice, swollen ears, palsy, worms, a twisted back, a sprained shoulder, and knock-kneed forelegs. His bit is hanging off and his cheap bridle, which is pulled tight, is pieced together with knots; his saddle strap is patched up and his tail strap is velvet, studded with the initials of some woman, and here and there held together with thread.
It wasn't me. It was Chiron and Demetrius; they raped her and cut out her tongue, and so they're responsible for all this.
Maybe you're right, but humans can't create anything in nature that doesn't already have the potential to exist; the "engineering" that you say is contrary to nature is actually enabled by nature itself. You see, sweetheart, if we graft a purebred plant to a weed, we can make the weed produce a beautiful flower. This is "engineering" that improves nature, but the engineering itself is all natural.
Beat me?
What did you say, master?
Come on, good wine isn't bad if you don't drink too much of it. Stop swearing against wine. Now, good lieutenant, am I right in thinking that you know I care about you?
Did the goddess Diana ever grace a forest like Kate now graces this room with her queenly walk? Oh, you be Diana, then, and let Diana be Kate. Then let Kate be the chaste one, while Diana is my love.
[To himself] And you and other men have left me with the readiness that the bird flees from winter weather.[To the others] Dinner is getting cold, gentlemen! Enjoy the music, if you like such humble playing. Let's go.
He's not yet old enough to be a man, but not young enough to be a boy either. He's like a pea pod or an apple just before it's ripe. He's like a slack tide, caught between coming in and going outbetween boyhood and manhood. He's very good-looking, but he's nagging. It seems like he's just barely stopped breastfeeding.
They're waiting at the door, sir.
Try your legs then sir, and put them in motion.
Heavenly Diana, silver goddess, I will obey you. Helicanus!
[To himself] That won't be anytime soon.
For both our sakes, I hope that's true.
I think she'd do better as a soldier. Swords might withstand her, but never lutes.
No, listen to me.
Show me your humble heart, and not your knee; you're only pretending to be dutiful.
Oh, good! Convey? Youre all conveyers, taking advantage of a true kings fall to raise yourselves up.
Get going.
Oh, you foul thief! Where have you hidden my daughter? Since you're damned yourself, you probably cast a spell on her! I'll stake my case on plain evidence and common sense as to whether such a tender, beautiful, and happy virgin girlone who was so opposed to marriage that she shunned even the wealthy, good-looking young men of our citywould have ever risked her reputation to run away from her protected home into the dirty embrace of such a thing as you, a thing to be feared and not loved, unless she had been caught by magic. Let the world be my judge: isn't it completely obvious that you have practiced some evil magic on her, and abused her delicate youth with drugs or toxins that make her weak? I'll bring you to court. This is most likely what happened. Therefore, I hereby arrest you as a criminal and a practitioner of illegal black magic. [To the officers] Get a hold of him. If he resists you, subdue him even if it means hurting him.
What's new at court?
Do you think that my uncle was lying, grandmother?
"Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir!" You blockheaded servants! What, I'll get no service from you? No respect? No duty? Where is the foolish villain I sent ahead of me?
What, can you say all this and not blush with shame?
Three of them claim to have danced for the king, but they're all liars.
Please Apemantus, could you read the different lines in these letters? I can't make any sense of them.
[As LUCENTIO] Well, sir, I'll do you a favor, and help you out and give you some advice. But first tell me, have you ever been to Pisa?
Are you going to the forest, or the town?
It would be better if they were all on his father's side, or if none at all were on his father's side. For as it is, the contest over which uncles will be closest to the king is likely to affect all of us, if God doesn't prevent it. The Duke of GloucesterRichardis a dangerous man. And Queen Elizabeth's sons and brothers are haughty and proud. This sickly country will only have a chance of being healed if they end up as subjects, not rulers.
Oh, if only the cities that have enough, who enjoy the tastes of prosperity, with their superfluous riots, would hear these tears! One day, they could be as miserable as Tarsus.
The place where you live proclaims you to be a prostitute.
Peter, did you ever see the likes of this?
Now youre just going to talk again about banishment.
Why, she's not coming to borrow money from them.
Come on, sir, please, let's go.
Oh, shut the door! And when youve done that, come weep with me. My situation is beyond hope, beyond cure, beyond help!
My Lord Aumerle, I know youll be ashamed to take back what you said before. When we were plotting the Duke of Gloucesters death, I heard you say: Isnt my arm long enough to reach my uncles head in Calais? And among other things, that time, I heard you say that you would rather refuse a hundred thousand pounds than see Bolingbroke ever come back to England, adding what a blessing you thought it would be if your cousin died.
What, what, Lychorida!
Such a calm submission is both dishonorable and vile! The thrust of a sword will sweep it away. [Draws his sword] Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you duel with me?
I can't tell what's going on. The world has grown so bad that little wrens now live where eagles dare not perch. Since every peasant has become a nobleman, there are now many noblemen who've been turned into peasants.
[So only TRANIO can hear] But her sister is silent, and seems to have a proper girl's mildness and obedience. Quiet, Tranio.
Please, tell me one thing first.
A greater gift? Oh, that must mean a sword.
Oh, who has done this to you?
I come as Varro's servant, sir
It's gotten too much praise. If I paid you based on how much it's been praised, I would go broke.
You had a Clarence too, and Richard killed him. The kennel of your womb has let loose a hellhound that hunts us all to deatha dog that had teeth before it had eyes. His teeth attack lambs and lap up their gentle blood. He is the greatest tyrant of the earth, and thrives among the tears of those he has injured. That foul creature who defaces God's handiwork came forth from your womb to chase us to our graves. Oh, upright, just, and generous God, how can I thank you enough that this deadly mutt preys on his mother's offspring and makes her a companion to others' sorrow?
Who, Camillo?
Damn her inexperience!
Well said. Sit then, and talk with her. She is yours. Come here, Ariel! My busy servant, Ariel!
Strong as a tower in my hopes, I cry out "amen."
This is how strangers are mistreated and abused!Oh you monstrous villain!
You think my mind will be changed that easily, like a feather carried on the wind? Do you expect me to wait around until this bastard can kneel and call me "father?" It's better to burn it now than to deal with it then. But fine, let it live. I'll neither burn it nor keep it.[To ANTIGONUS] You! You've been in cahoots with the Wicked Witch, your wife, to save this bastard's life (and it is a bastard, as sure as my beard is gray). What are you willing to do to save this brat's life?
I think you're about to turn back into a baby!
Oh, help me!
The same to you, sir! I owe you for that lovely singing last night. I swear I've never heard such a great voice.
Never, Paulina, God bless my soul!
Quiet your outrage for a time, until we can clear up the remaining uncertainties about the cause of all this. Once we do know what happened, I will lead you in expressing our pain, all the way to our deaths. In the meantime, hold on, and let your patience control your desire to act. Bring forth the men under suspicion.
It's appropriate that I am treated like this, very appropriate. What have I ever done to make him find the smallest thing to complain about?
[As CAMBIO] Enough, fiddler! You grow too forward, sir. Have you already forgotten how her sister Katherina thanked you for your insistence?
How's it going, Grumio?
Why, that is nothing. I tell you, father, I am as domineering as she is proud-minded, and when two raging fires come together, they cancel each other out. A little wind will make a little fire great, but a great gust will blow the fire out. I'll be the great gust to her fire, and she will yield to me, for I am rough and don't woo like a child.
Richard of York, how are you, my loving brother?
Then it shouldnt matter who sees it; I will be satisfied in this. Let me see the letter.
I have naught to do with this, my lord.
Some men think so. Go now and take your dogs with you.
Then bring them before us: we will hear the accuser and the accused make their case, face to face. They're both proud men, full of anger, and their rage makes them too hasty and quick to take offense.
If you knew who I was, you'd talk to me.
[To the gentlemen] If you're loyal to me, you better get her out of this room! If I were a tyrant, she would be dead by now. She wouldn't dare to call me that if she actually thought I were one. Take her away!
Ill go, sir, and not interfere.
Let him do his worst. My good deeds done in service to the city government will have more influence than his complaints. It's not yet well-knownand I won't spread this news until I hear that it's an honor to boastbut I am descended from men of royal lineage. So I'm worthy of the noble fortune of Desdemona's family. And know this, Iago: if I didn't love the gentle Desdemona, I wouldn't give up all my freedom for the confines and restrictions of marriagenot in return for all the treasure in the sea. But look, what light is that, coming from over there?
[To ARIEL so that only he can hear] My ingenious spirit!
Katherine, I want you to tell these headstrong women what kind of obedience they owe to their lords and husbands.
Knights, I hardly need to say how welcome you are. To write an endorsement of the book of your good deeds, like on a title page, would be more than is needed, since you've already showed your worth by doing the deeds themselves. So, get ready to laugh, since feasts are best enjoyed with laughter. All of you princes are my guests.
Aha! Does she?
[Kneeling and exposing his neck] I sharpened the axe myself. Just strike the blow.
Is Leontes all right?
[Looks at weapon] What's this? A scroll tied around? Let's see.[Reads] "Integer vitae, scelerisque purus, / Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu."
Certainly, men should be what they seem to be.
Banish us both and send the king with me.
My luck . . . parents . . . good parents . . . like me! Was it really? What did you say?
Who is your lord?
You are welcome, sir.
Not under the advice of a man even more miserable. You are a slave, a dog, who was always unlucky. If you were born like I was into a sweet life this world gives to whoever it likes, you would have gone crazy and wasted your youth in lusty beds. You would never have learned hard reason, but instead followed all temptations before you. But I, who was born right in the place where all sweet things are made, and where countless mouths, tongues, eyes, and hearts of men waited at my command, stuck to me like leaves stick to an oak, I was abandoned by all them, as if those leaves had all dropped at the first sight of winter and left me bare to feel every storm. Trust me, you who never knew any better, bearing this tragedy is a great burden. Your life began in suffering, and you have grown used to it. Why should you hate men? They never flattered you? What did you give them? If you will curse anyone it should be your father, because he had sex with some poor woman out of spite and conceived you. So just go away! If you had not been born in the worst position, you would have been a false flatterer.
Only so that she can give up that title, as her mother has.
I swear, that seems the truth. For himself to ruin, he says. Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I can find young Romeo?
Truly, I think they have.
You're lying through your teeth. Queen Margaret saw your murderous sword steaming with his bloodthe same sword with which you once tried to kill her. She was only saved because your brothers restrained you.
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] Cheer up, mother. How are you feeling?
No, good sailor, I'll dock here a little longer. My lady, would you call off your giant here?
I never saw a better-made gown, or one more elegant, pleasing, and praiseworthy. It seems like you're trying to make a plaything out of me.
Well then, there are many monsters in big cities, and many monsters that pass for men.
Many thanks, friend. Go on. This is helping. Your advice is good, so I know the rest of it will comfort me.
I can only repeat what I've memorized, and that question isn't part of my lines. Please, gentle lady, just assure me that you are the lady of the house, so I can go on with my speech.
Be calm. Don't be scared. Tell your heart, which is full of pity, that no harm was done to anyone.
I'm a man whom the waves and the wind have hit around like a tennis ball all day in gigantic tennis court of the sea. Please, have pity on me. I'm asking you, and I don't usually beg.
He'll stay, sweetheart.
Farewell, sweet teachers. I must go.
How did we land here?
[To LODOVICO] This is Othello's flag-bearer, I think.
No doubt, my lord.
[To PERDITA] Chin up, sweetheart. Nothing that my father does can change the love we have for each other. [To LEONTES] Sir, I beg youthink of what you were like when you were my age and in love. Defend me to my father. If you ask, he'll give you an expensive gift as quickly as if it were a cheap one.
May your angels protect us, heaven! What were those things?
My husband?
Did you pick up on that?[To himself] They're all gossiping about me already, whispering, "Leontes is such-and-such." It'll be too late by the time I hear about it. Camillo, why did he finally decide to stay?
You devil! [He hits DESDEMONA]
Back off, if you see him get angry.
Go, some of you, and convey him to the Tower.
Then give me permission to go.
Go, tie up those dangling apricots, which overburden their parent tree with their weight, like unruly childrengive some support to the bending twigs. Go and, like an executioner, cut off the heads of plants that grow too fast and too high: in our commonwealth, this garden, we must govern fairly and make sure no plant is taller than the others. While you're busy with that, I'll pull out the useless weeds that suck the soil's nutrients from our healthy flowers.
When daffodils begin to bloom,(Say "hey!") roll around in the grass with your loverSince spring, the best time of the year, is here,After a winter of waiting and wanting.The clean white sheets hanging out to dry(Say "hey!") and the birds' beautiful singingHave me hankering for a hook-up.I'm no snoban ugly girl satisfies as much as any other.The lark that chirps, "tweet, tweet!"(Say "hey!" Say "hey!"), the thrush, and the blue jayAre the perfect soundtrack for me and my ladies,While we get down in the hay.[He interrupts his song] I served Prince Florizel back in the day and used to wear a fancy suit, but now I'm out of a job.But am I crying over that, sweetheart?The moon shines in the night:Its light guides me as I wander around after-hoursAt which time I (mostly) do good.If we tolerate handymenWho live on a piss-poor budgetThen I might as well "fix" my income.I'll pay for it with jail time if I have to.I'm in the sheets business. If you see a hawk like me swooping in, you better get out your second-best linens. My father named me "Autolycus." Like me, he was destined to be a thief, and, like me, he spent his time snapping up overlooked goodies. I paid for this outfit by pimpingnot to mention the additional profit of cheap booty. The threats of jail and death are pretty real out here on the street. I live in constant fear of being beaten or hanged, and I can't even think about the afterlife! I drink to forget about it.[Seeing the shepherd's son] Ah, here's a treat!
And can't young men die as well as old men?
I do. He sent me an invitation, and when I said I had other engagements, he pressed me further and told me I had to come.
The tears havent won much, since my face wasnt all that nice before I started to cry.
It's no problem for me, sir, as I'm only begging on a beggar's behalf. The famous lover Cressida became a beggar in her old age, they say. My lady is inside, sir. I'll explain where you come from, but who you are and what you want are beyond my knowledge. I'd say I'm "not in my element," but those words are overused.
But I say it wasn't him, and I am sure you will believe me, even if you were inclined to think otherwise .
[To ANTONIO] Alonso enjoys these comforting words about as much as he enjoys cold soup.
Paulina, I won't marry until you tell me.
What are you all laughing at?
Your master will be dead before you get back; there's no way on earth to help him now.[To PHILEMON] Give this to the doctor, and tell me how it works.
Yes, but the leopard won't change its spots: to take that gage from me is to take my honor. My dear dear lord, the purest treasure of our lives is spotless reputation: without that, men are just painted clay and gilded dust. A brave spirit in a loyal person is like a jewel in a chest protected by ten locks. My honor is my life; both grow together. If you take my honor from me, my life is done. Then, my dear liege, let me prove my integrity in combat: I live for my honor and will die for it.
I did, my lord.
Oh my liege, pardon me, if you please; if not, I will be content not to be pardoned. Will you seize and grip into your hands all the rightful inheritance of banished Hereford? Isn't Gaunt dead, and doesn't Hereford live? Was not Gaunt fair, and is not Harry loyal? Didn't Gaunt deserve to have an heir? Is not his heir a well-deserving son? Take Hereford's rights away, and you take away ancient customs and rights: tomorrow won't come after today, and you won't be yourselffor how are you a king except by fair inheritance and succession? Now, before GodGod forbid my prediction comes true!if you wrongfully seize Hereford's rights, taking away his legal right to the income and honors of the dukedom of Lancaster, you bring a thousand dangers on your head, you lose a thousand hearts that would have been well-disposed towards you, and you test my patience by bringing me to thoughts which honor and allegiance cannot allow me to think.
[Looking at VIOLA] Is that me standing there? I never had a brother, and I'm not a god who can be everywhere at once. I had a sister, but she was drowned by the cruel ocean. Please tell me, are you related to me? What country are you from? What is your name? Who are your parents?
Lets get out of here, Tybalt.
Please, lead the way without doing any more talking. Trinculo, since the king and everyone else we were with have drowned, were the rightful owners of this place. Here, carry my wine bottle. My good friend Trinculo, well fill that bottle again soon.
[Sitting down] My life has died. My sight has gone blind. I'm like a ghost that's still alive. I am the bearer of misfortune; the shame of the world; a soul that rightfully belongs to the grave. As a summary and brief record of my unbearable life, I will rest my restless bones on England's lawful earth, which is now covered with innocent blood, against the laws of man and nature.
Every little thing.
then we could get rid of all the men that are robbing the king of his wealth.
My mistake.
Dont be sad too, fair woman; it will bring me to my end sooner. Good soul, pretend that our old life was a happy dream that weve not woken up from. My only companion now is Necessity, sweetheart, and Ill be with him until my death. Go to France to some religious house; well find another crown in heaven, although weve lost the ones we had on earth.
Camillo, if you're loyal to me, you wouldn't think of leaving me now; I need your services especially (and, since I've been spoiled with a servant as effective as you, I can hardly settle for someone else). Plus, you've built industries for me here that no one but you can take care of, so you either need to stay here to do it yourself, or take your projects with you. I can never thank you enough for all the work you've doneand for your friendship. Please, don't talk about Sicily anymore. The name alone dredges up bad memories of that "remorseful" king (as you call him), my friend, and the loss of his wife and children, which we should be mourning even now. Anyway, when did you last see my son, Prince Florizel? It's just as bad for a king to misplace a good son as to have a bad one at hand.
Flatter me in my sorrow then. Tell me what rank, what dignity, or what honor you could possibly offer to any child of mine?
We'll appreciate it, my lord.
You never inhabited the middle ranks of humanity, only the very rich and the very poor. When you were basking in gold in perfume, they all mocked you for your meticulousness. In your tattered rags you don't have any of that left, but are despised for being messy and dirty. Here's a little fruit for you, eat it.
You are my husband and my lord, my lord and my husband, and I am your obedient wife.
Yes. We do all have the same goal, and mine is money.
Well, if you're someone who accepts challenges, then I'll challenge you.
What kind of foul-mouthed jerk are you?
Bless you, Apollo!
Whaf if  I ask you to stay?
I hope you're lucky enough to hear the true story. Come on, madam, lets go.
"To Jove," that's for you; here, "To Apollo"; "To Mars," that's for me. Here, boy, to Pallas; here, to Mercury; to Saturn; Caius. Not to Saturnineyou might as well shoot against the wind. Get to it, boy! Marcus, let your arrow fly when I tell you. I swear Ive written to every god for justice.
Goodbye, my lord: I see bravery and virtue in your eyes. Order the fight, marshal, and begin.
I have a jewel right here
I told you, sir, they were wildly drunkso full of inflated courage that they were striking at the air with their swords for blowing in their faces, and hitting the ground for touching their feet. Yet at the same time theyve never lost sight of their plan. Then I beat my drum, at whichlike colts that had never been riddenthey pricked up their ears, looked around, and lifted their noises as if to smell the music. So with my music I put a spell on their ears that made them follow me like trusting calves through sharp-leaved bushes, prickly shrubs, and thornsall of which stuck in their vulnerable shins. Finally, I left them in the middle of the scum-covered pond behind your hut, with the stinking water lapping at their chins.
Who is his noble cousinmost wicked king! But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest coming, but see no shelter in which to hide from the storm; we see the wind wreck our sails, and if we don't strike back, we'll surely die.
Almost as well as I know myself. I have thought about her suffering a hundred times, and it has made me cry.
Now youve hit it.
Please, Timon, tell us what it is.
I was saying: he used magic to take over this island. He took it from me. If your Highness will take revenge on himbecause I know that you're brave enough to do it, though this thing [He points to TRINCULO] wouldn't dare
Apemantus is inhuman. Come, shall we go in and taste Lord Timon's bounty? He exceeds the meaning of the word kindness.
Good god! Is that hateful man in tatters, looking so down and out, really my lord? Oh he is a memorial of what happens when good deeds are received ungratefully! Poverty has made such a remarkable change to his honorable appearance! How vile his friends were to bring down such a great man! It really shows the accuracy of that saying, "Love your enemies!" I would indeed much rather love those who wish me harm to my face than those who pretend to be my friends and stab me in the back.[Noticing TIMON] He has seen me, and I will show him how much I grieve for him, and how I promise still to serve him. My fine master!
And yet I fear you, because when your eyes roll like that I know you're in a deadly mood. I don't know why I should be afraid, since I am not guilty of anything. But I am afraid nonetheless.
Whose is it, then?
He's a senseless villain, good Hortensio. I told the rascal to knock on your door and couldn't for the life of me get him to do it.
Of course, once the most important thing has been obtainedher love, that is. That is everything.
Oh, Fortune. People say that you are fickle, always changing your mind. If you are so fickle, what will you do to Romeo, who is so renowned for being faithful? Be fickle, Fortune, and do not keep him away long. Instead send him back to Verona soon.
Because the girl shouldn't live any longer after having been dishonored, and by staying alive she reminds him of his grief.
I know your reputation, and I have a lot of respect for you.
Just now, my lord.
Tut, tut, my lord, we won't stand around and chat. Talkers are not good doers. Rest assured that we go to use our hands, not our tongues.
It is my wretched fate.
Who should begin?
I beg your pardon, but it will be good for me to walk.
Who is she?
You say this, but you have no proof. You have no clear evidence beyond your thin accusations and poor guesses based on his appearance.
[From offstage] Who's that calling?
My God! What trouble I must have been to you then!
Oh, how that name fits me! Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old: grief has made me lose my appetite, and the man who doesn't eat loses weight. I've stayed up late to keep an eye on sleeping England, and lack of sleep makes you thin too. And I am fasting as well of the pleasure that some fathers feed onby which I mean the sight of my childrenand so by depriving me of that, you have  made me gaunt: I am gaunt for the grave, gaunt as a grave, whose hollow womb inherits nothing but bones.
That you are well descended.
Then, noble listeners, you should all know that it was Chiron and Demetrius who murdered our emperor's brother and raped our sister. For their foul crimes our brothers were beheaded, and my father's tears were mocked and his handthe hand which has fought so many battles for Rome and sent her enemies to the gravecut off as a joke. Lastly, I was unkindly banished from Rome. The gates shut on me and I turned away crying, and went to seek help from Rome's enemies. They drowned their hatred for Rome in my own honest tears and treated me as their friend. I'm the one who was turned away and yet I have saved Rome with my own blood, turning the knife's point away from her and allowing it to pierce my own body. Oh, you know that I'm no boaster; my scars (although they're silent) can prove that what I say is fair and honest. But wait! I think I'm talking too much in praise of myself. Forgive me, for people praise themselves when friends aren't around to do it for them.
Is Sir Lucentio inside, sir?
That is a deed that you will die for.
May you reign many years in happiness, my gracious King, my most loving lord!
He won't marry again unless another woman, the spitting image of Hermione, crosses his eye.
[Singing while helping PROSPERO dress]Where the bee drinks, I do too.In the cup of a cowslip flower is where I lie.That's where I sleep when the owls hoot.I fly on a bats backJoyfully chasing summer around the Earth.Happily, happily I will live nowUnder the blossom that hangs on the branch.
Oh, "Doricles," you exaggerate. If it weren't oh-so-obvious that you're nothing more than an innocent shepherd, I'm afraid I'd think you were just trying to get in my pants!
[To himself] He's going to ask Lucius and Lucullus, of all people?
Mistress!
Find him and tell him to come to me. Tell him I have persuaded my husband on his behalf, and I hope that everything will be resolved.
Prepare yourself with whatever fighting defenses you have. I don't know what you've done to insult him, but someone is full of defiance and bloodthirstiness towards you, and he waits for you at the end of the garden. Draw your sword and prepare yourself swiftly, for your assailant is quick, skillful, and deadly.
Then, as a gift from me and as your well-earned reward, take my daughter. But if you take her virginity before the marriage ceremony is performed according to all the sacred traditions, the heavens will not shower blessings on your marriage. Instead, empty hate, bitter disrespect, and conflict will ruin your marriage until you both grow to despise it. So listen to what I'm saying if you want to have a happy marriage blessed by Hymen.
Orphans never suffered so great a loss.
[To RICHARD] May I weigh down your soul tomorrow! It's me, Rivers, who died at Pomfret. Despair, and die!
He wounded too many men. He's a crazy drunk, and that vice ruins his honor. He would fight even if he had no enemies, and in his temper he has committed many crimes and encourages rebellion. We have been told that he is a dangerous and wicked man.
Count my blood drop by drop and take it from me.
Yes my lord?
Lord Cerimon has received trustworthy letters saying my father's dead.
Why do you look so sad today, your Grace?
Do you ladies have no manners? Is this how you treat each other? Isn't there some other place where you could call each other names, instead of doing it here in front of all our guests? Now everyone's whispering about you. Please shut up; don't say anything else.
I die as an innocent.
If they just overheard me, I'm dead.
Hey, what time is it?
I'll have you burned to death.
Well, I can go too, can't I? What, do I have to start making appointments now, as if I didn't know when to come and go?
Are you scared?
Then tell us immediately what you know about all this.
Of course I can, sir.
Ha, don't worry about me.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father he is! But didn't you hear how he wanted to hire good tutors to instruct her?
Who is that?
Is there more work to do? Since youre giving me new chores, let me remind you what you promised to me but havent yet actually done for me.
Please stop arguing with me. Will you do him well? He'll give you a lot of money.
It won't be the first time someone has had to call me "villain." You begin, Fool. It begins, "Shut your mouth."
Are you still so cruel?
What shrill-voiced petitioner is shouting at us?
Set down, set down your honorable load, menif honor can be shrouded in a coffinwhile I solemnly mourn the early death of virtuous Henry.
Any man who can write is able to answer a letter.
Yes.
That won't matter. Let it fly off. No one will take it in.
Silence! If you say another word, Ill scold you, maybe even hate you. What, youre taking the side of an impostor? Be quiet. You think no one else is as beautiful as him, because youve seen only him and Caliban. Foolish girl, to most people this man looks like a Caliban, and compared to him, most people look like angels.
Sir Baptista, will you really act so unnaturally? I'm sorry that our good will towards Bianca should cause her grief.
[To SECOND SERVINGMAN] Fetch logs that are drier. Call Peter. Hell show you where they are.
You hardly have the heart to tell me, so you must not have the heart to do it. Besides, my friends, have I offended you?
Welcome home, Grumio.
Yes, right, a verse from Horace. You've got it. [To himself] Ha, what an ass! This is no jokethe old man knows that they're guilty, and sends them weapons wrapped with words that wound them, although they don't pick up on it. But if our sly empress were here, she would applaud Andronicus's cleverness. But we'll leave her be for a while, since she's unwell.[To CHIRON and DEMETRIUS] And now, young lordswasn't it lucky that we came to Rome, since we arrived as foreigners and captives and now have so much power? It pleased me to have a go at Marcus Andronicus at the palace gate in front of his brother.
How can that be?
Take a look at the badges they wear indicating for whom they work, then tell me if they are honest. This ugly monster [He points at CALIBAN] had a mother who was a witch so powerful that she could control the moon and the tides. These three have stolen from me. And this half-devilonly half-devil because he's a bastardplotted with them to kill me. You must recognize two of these men, and accept responsibility for them. I admit that this dark monster is mine.
Sir, if I thought that I was actually awake, Id try to tell you. We were fast asleep andwe dont know howwe were below decks, when we heard all these different, strange noises: roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains, and more. All of these noises were so horrible that they woke us up. Immediately we were free, and we saw our courageous ship. The master danced with joy when he saw it. An instant later, as if in a dream, we were separated from the others and brought here in a daze.
Where have I been? The real question is, where are you? Master, has Tranio stolen your clothes? Or have you stolen his? Or both? Please tell me, what's going on?
His ship is strongly put together, and the captain is an expert. Therefore I have hope that he will be okay, and haven't resigned myself to thinking he's dead.
Let me live here forever. Such a wonderful father-in-law and wife make this place a paradise.
If he will pay the price. But for that
Say your prayers, now.
Well, come again tomorrow. Farewell. A devil who wore your face could lead my soul to hell.
Oh, brother Montague, give me your hand. This handshake is my daughters dowry. I can ask you for nothing more.
Tell her that the King, who has the power to command, instead begs her
Prince Pericles
Im willing to resign my crown, but my sadness is still mine: you may take my crown and my kingdom from me, but not my sadness: Im still king of that.
He won't spare anyone.
Stand by me, Lucius; don't be afraid of your aunt.
Oh, welcome, father! Father, can I respectfully ask you to explain (though we recently wanted to hide it, the time is now ripe to reveal it) what you know has happened between this youth and me?
Oh good Sir Toby, stop! Here come the officers.
And what will you do with him, Tranio?
Oh my, lieutenant! What villains have done this?
Her silence mocks me, and I'll get my revenge on her.
My father, the king, left me in Tarsus until the king, Cleon, and his evil wife tried to murder me. They had even hired a criminal to do it, but right as he was about to, a group of pirates came and rescued me and brought me to Mytilene. [PERICLES begins to cry] Sir, did I say something wrong? Why are you crying? Maybe you think I'm a fake, but I'm not: I'm good King Pericles's daughter, if good King Pericles is still alive.
Did God create in you a beautiful blank slate just to write "whore" on it? What sin did you commit? Commit? Oh, you public prostitute! If I even spoke of what you did, my mouth would burn up modesty itself just by uttering the words. What sin have you committed? Heaven and the moon itself, the wind and the depths of the earth all turn away and don't want to hear about it. What sin have you committed? You shameless whore!
I don't think there is any such woman who would do it.
Don't worry, Baptista, we will satisfy you. You'll see. But I will go inside and get some revenge for this villainy.
I have already.
Amen, my lady.
Calm down Titus.
I agree with you completely, your Highness. I said those things to give these gentlemen a good time, since they have such strong lungs that they so often use to laugh at meaningless trivialities.
"If not, just keep acting like a servant."
[Singing]The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,Everyone sing a green willow.With her hand on her chest and her head on her knee,Sing willow, willow, willow.The fresh streams ran by her, and murmured along with her moans,Sing willow, willow, willow.Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones,Sing willow, willow, willowPut these things down over there, Emilia.[Singing]Willow, willowPlease, hurry up, he'll come any minute now.[Singing]Everyone sing a green willow must be my garland.Let nobody blame him, I approve of his scornNo, that's not the next line. Listen! Who is that knocking at the door?
But since you came too late to see the execution as we intended, at least bear witness t our good intentions. And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid you farewell.
To the platform, gentlemen. Come on, let's take up our posts for tonight's guard.
Then he must have found it. I never gave it to him. Send for him to come here, and let him tell you the truth.
Great to no one but those like yourself, and you but to Timon.
Give up this attempt, and save your souls. Which of you, if you were in my positiona prince's son in prison, and two murderers like yourselves came to youwouldn't beg for your life? Yes, you would beg, if you were in my situation.
Where is kind Hastings?
Madam!
[Whispering] Didn't I say he would figure it out? This dog is excellent at tracking.
I say, my lord, that if I were a man, these slaves wouldnt be safe in their mothers bedroom.
Yes.
[To GREGORY so that only he can hear] Will the law be on our side if I say yes?
[Whispering] What a dish of poison she's prepared for him!
My lord, whoever ends up journeying to meet the prince, for God's sake let us be part of the group. Along the way I'll create an opportunity to separate him from the queen's proud relativesas the first step in the plan we discussed recently.
Be nearby, since I might mess this up.
How? Has a donkey broken down the wall, so you find yourself outside the city?
By my god, I swear to you that I will.
Brave son of great Andronicuswhose name once terrorized us and now comforts us, and whose honorable service to Rome has been badly repaidyou can count on us. We'll go where you lead us, like stinging bees led by the beekeeper to a field of flowers, and take revenge on cursed Tamora.
Hey, Brabantio! Sir Brabantio, hey!
Yes, him, woman. I said "your husband"do you understand the words? My friend, your husband, the honest, honest Iago.
Yes, my good lord: he owes five talents, and even though he has such a small income, his creditors are insistent that he give it back right away. He wants a letter from you to those who have imprisoned him, without which he claims he'll have no comfort.
Indeed, your nephews were cheated by their uncle of their comfort, kingdom, relatives, freedom, and life. Some other hand might have pierced their tender hearts, but you're the one who gave the order. No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt until it was sharpened against your hard heart of stone, and after that it could rejoice among my little lambs' bloody innards. But constant talk of grief makes wild grief tame, so I won't say my boys' names again until I've anchored my fingernails in your eyes and gouged them out. I am like a poor boat without sails in a stormy bay of death, and I'll break myself to pieces against your rocky heart.
How is my Kate doing? What, sweetheart, why so dejected?
Alas! But for whose sake did I do that terrible deed? For my brother Edward, for his sake. He can't be sending you to murder me for the prince's deathbecause in that, he is just as guilty as I am. If God intends to punish me for this deed, oh, you know that he will do it publicly! God has no need for indirect or illegal methods of killing those who have offended him.
Go, some of you, and get a mirror.
You disobedient wretch of a worthless girl! Ill tell you what: get yourself to church on Thursday or never again look me in the face. Dont speak. Dont reply. Dont answer me. [JULIET rises] My fingers itch to slap you. Wife, we never thought we had been blessed that God gave us just this one child, but now I see that this one is one too many. We were cursed when we had her. She sickens me, the good-for-nothing.
Indeed, but you will be, and here's my hand. [He offers her his hand]
She says that your dog is badly-behaved. And she tells you that a snide "thanks" is good enough for a present like that.
What do you mean, sir?
Oh, devil, devil! If the whole world were filled with the tears of women, they'd all be fake tears! Get out of my sight!
I remember that face well, though the last time I saw it it was blackened by the smoke of war. He was the captain of a small, flimsy ship, worthless because of its sizebut with that pitiful boat he fought such a damaging battle against my fleet's most noble warship that we had to admire him even in our bitter defeat.[To the officer] What's going on here?
What, are trying to make a fool of me?
Give me a moment to breathe, dear lord, a pause before I make a statement. I'll give you my answer shortly.
If you consider that a joke, then the rest was too.
Did you hear that, Petruchio? She says she'll see you hanged first.
Really?
May God and your swords be praised, victorious friends! The day is ours. The bloody dog is dead.
No, Ill bite my thumb at them. Thats an insult, and theyll be disgraced if they dont react. [He bites his thumb]
Her honor belongs to her, too. Can she give that away, as well?
Poison never fell onto a fouler toad. Get out of my sight! You're infecting my eyes.
Then it's certain that they are going for Cyprus. Is Marcus Luccicos not in town?
You are too arrogant, Apemantus.
I won't say a word; I'll be perfectly polite. Come on, start the music!
It's good, sir, that you hunted for yourself. There's a rumor that your deer has faced you down and cornered you.
Make him your lieutenant, please. He can barely stand up straight, much less hold a flag.
Father, have pity on him. Ill be the guarantee of his goodness.
You say you dont know what Juliet wants. Thats a treacherous road. I dont like it.
[Giving the letter to FABIAN] You read it, sir.
I will then, sir. And as for what I promised you, I'll be as good as my word. He is easy to ride, and responds well to the reins.
Stop, Toby! I command you to stop!
He may command me as my king, but you still have power over me as my relative.
I know one unhappy gentleman whose empty wallet doesn't match his proud spirit. Gold is better than twenty speeches, and will, no doubt, tempt him to do anything.
Great Timon
We will descend and embrace him. Cousin of Hereford, if your cause is just, may you be victorious in this royal fight! Farewell, my blood;  if that blood is shed today, we'll lament it, but we won't take revenge.
Give him my regards. I will send his ransom and when he is free I will ask him to come to me. It is not enough simply to help the weak stand. One must also support them after helping them up. Farewell.
Ill protect you from that word by using the cure for adversityphilosophywhich will comfort you even though youve been banished.
Should we take that to mean that you've slipped up since then?
Hello, sir, what do you want?
[To the PRINCE] My lord, would you like to continue on? My good cousin Buckingham and I will go to your mother and ask her to meet you at the Tower.
The plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Look, he's coming here.
Calm down, siras bad as this is.
Father, and wife, and gentlemenfarewell. I'm off to Venice. Sunday is coming soon. We will have rings, and things, and fine clothes, and kiss me, Kate. We will be married on Sunday.
I wish all the world but him would reject her, so she'd have only that poor schoolteacher to accept her as a wife! But as for me, I will surely keep my promise. I plan to marry a wealthy widow before three days have passed. She's been in love with me for as long as I've been pursuing this proud, disdainful vixen. And so farewell, Sir Lucentio. From now on, kindness in women, not their beauty, will win my love. And so I bid you farewell, and am resolved to keep my promise.
Oh, so you're not the boss of her?
Look: the midwife, Mrs. Rumor, signed her name to prove it, along with five or six eyewitnesses. Why would I sell lies?
Oh God!
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] Good day to you, your royal Grace.
No, my good lord; but Pluto says that you will have revenge from hell, if you ask for it. He thinks that Justice is busy with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else, so you need to wait a bit.
I believe you. Please, look at me. You remind me of someone . . . where are you from? From this country?
But Clarence died by your first order, the poor man. The death sentence must have been carried by Mercury, the winged messenger god, while the counter-order was carried by some slow cripple. It arrived too late even for his burial. It seems that someone less noble and less loyalnearer in bloody thoughts but not a blood relationdeserves the punishment that poor Clarence got, but instead goes free without suspicion.
Well, they listened to me as closely as they would to their own father's will being read. There was a Spanish guy whose mouth watered so much, he went to masturbate off just the description of her.
Then patiently listen to my impatience.
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see hereI snatched him from the jaws of death and nursed him back to health with tenderness and love, and I thought that he seemed so noble and worthy that I totally devoted myself to him.
You holy clergymen, cant we do something to rid the kingdom of him?
Do you want to hear it again?
No, and he didn't look at us.
Oh, dont touch me. Im not Stephano, Im just a cramp on two legs.
No, I joke because I'm mocking my own misery: since you have tried to kill my family name by banishing my son, I mock my name to flatter you.
Well, dont swear. Although you bring me joy, I cant take joy in this exchange of promises tonight. Its too wild, thoughtless, sudden. Its too much like lightning, which disappears before you can even say, its lightning. My love, good night. Our love, which now is like a flower bud, may blossom in the summer air into a beautiful flower by the next time we meet. Good night! I hope you feel in your heart the same sweet calm and rest that I feel in mine.
Have you done everything possible to get him to explain?
Yes, sir.
I did say that what I first created the storm at sea. Tell me, my spirit, how are the king and his followers?
[To himself] These are handsome beings, if theyre not spirits. That one's a noble god, who carries liquor from the heavens. I'll bow down before him.
None in fact. Except when the northeast wind blew bitterly against our faces, making our eyes water.
Not only Lucius's Servant, but Philotus's too!
A cunning boy! Get out of here, you're too clever for your own good.
It's unthinkable!
Sir, you know your father has a temper. He doesn't want to hear from you right now, so I don't suggest you try it. He probably doesn't want to see you, either. Stay away from him until his anger dies down.
If you want, my lord, there are certain ladies who would like to come in.
And the third?
Only everything I haveyes, including myself. That's what I'll give to a child of yours. May Lethe drown your sad memories of the wrongs you imagine I've done to you.
The morning smiles as it replaces frowning night, and streaks light across the clouds in the east. Darkness staggers away from the suns path like a drunkard. Now, before the sun rises, bringing on the day and drying the dew, I must fill my basket with poisonous weeds and the precious nectar of flowers. The earth is both natures mother and its tomb. Plants arise from the earth as from a womb, and when they die, they are buried in the earth. Many different plants and animals come from the earths womb. All of these children find nourishment from the earth, and all have some special, unique virtue. There is a power that resides in herbs, plants, and stones. For theres nothing on earth thats so evil that it does not also provide the earth with some kind of good. Nor is there anything so good that it cant be turned bad if its abused and used incorrectly. Virtue, when misused, turns to vice, while vice can sometimes become virtue through proper action.
But sir, here comes your boy. He needs to learn his lines.
[Kneeling] I must ask you a favor in return for the service I've done for you, my king.
Oh, my dear Cassio! My sweet Cassio! Oh, Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Our mother will be forever shamed by this.
As long as they haven't actually done anything, it's just a pardonable sin. But, if I give my wife a handkerchief . . .
What, stuff from a house?
You mean to bear me, not to bear with me.
Then, as I was saying: the duke rode through the streets on a royal horse while everyone cried God save you, Bolingbroke! You would have thought the windows themselves were speaking, since so many people, young and old, leaned out their windows to get a look at him, and that the walls were crying out Jesus preserve you! Welcome, Bolingbroke! Meanwhile, he turned his head from one to the other, taking his hat off and speaking to them like this: I thank you, countrymen. And doing that, he went on his way.
[AUTOLYCUS takes the shepherd's son's wallet out of his pocket without him noticing] Carefully, my friend, very carefully . . . [The shepherd's son lifts AUTOLYCUS to his feet] You've really helped me out.
[To SEBASTIAN] Goodness, he just talks and talks and talks!
I might describe him as a god, because Ive never seen anything on earth that looked so noble.
Then I think tomorrow should be a favorable day.
Excellent.
God forbid that we should threaten our lord the king with such violence! Your noble cousin Henry Bolingbroke humbly kisses your hand, swearing by the honorable tomb of your royal grandfatherand by the royal blood that runs in both your veins, and by the hands of his father Gauntthat he comes here only to reclaim his righful property and to beg on his knees that you take back his banishment. Once he has that, he will let his glittering sword rust away, confining his horses to their stables and his heart to the faithful service of your majesty. As a prince, his word is good; as I am a gentleman, I believe him.
So soon? Go get all those men for me. Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius, all of them! I'll throw them one last party!
Ha, ha! Publius, Publius, what have you done? See, see, you've shot off one of Taurus's horns.
Who's she?
The Slys aren't villains, you whore. Look it upwe came over with Richard the Conqueror. So hold your tongue, and forget about it. Enough!
Boult, what are her assets?
Ah, now I can tell that you're as dumb as Timon.
Am I a gentleman?
If you got what you deserved, you would be taught to show some respect.
And here's my coat.
Some honest Christian give me another gage, so that I can throw it down and show that Norfolk lies:[throws down gage] I throw this down, so that if he comes back I can challenge him in battle.
[To herself] One Plantagenet makes up for another. Edward dies to pay the debt for another Edward's death.
Give it to the animals and get rid of all men.
He looks like he's crying out, "Oh dear Cassio!" That's what his gestures indicate.
You know that kings' moods can have serious consequences, right? How dare you make me angry?
A catchy song.
[Giving her the vial] Now go. Be strong and good luck. Ill send a friar speeding to Mantua with my letter to Romeo.
Yes, yes. I don't care about virtuous living.
But look what heaven can do! At one time, the earth, sea, and air were hardly enough to content and please our mouths, though they gave us all the food we needed to survive. Just as houses become run-down from lack of use, our mouths are now starved for lack of exercise. Two years ago we looked for the best recipes to please our palates; now we'd be happy to get a crust a bread, and beg for it. Women who once happily nursed their babies would hardly think it strange that they would now want to eat them. Hunger is such a grim reality that husbands and wives take bets on which of them will die first. Look, there's a man, and there's a woman crying. Here so many are sick that, even when someone dies, no one has the strength to bury them. Isn't this true?
You speak the truth. I won't marry again, since there's no one else like Hermione. If I married someone less wonderful than Hermione, yet treated that second wife better than I treated my first, I can only imagine Hermione's ghost would possess her body and come back to haunt me, asking "Why are you doing this to me?"
Give me my heart back again; I cant be responsible for killing your heart. So, now I have my heart again, be gone, so that I can kill it with a groan.
Close the garden door and let me be alone to hear this message.
A crazy dim-witted fool, thinking that he can presume to criticize me just because he's illdaring with his criticisms to make us turn pale, chasing the royal blood from our cheeks. Now, by the royal majesty of my throne, if you weren't my father's brother, I would have your head for this.
Do it, Paulina. This suffering is sweet to me. [Moving closer to HERMIONE] It looks like she's breathing. What artist could sculpt breath? No one make fun of me; I'm going to kiss her.
Hey, what is the matter? Who is it that cried out?
Ill frown at them as I pass by them. How they respond is up to them.
Flag-bearer, lead them to her. You know the place where she is the best.
Are you full of such jokes?
And if you're visibly worried, you'll make him worse. So for God's sake, let us comfort you, and then you can cheer up his Majesty with your lively, happy mood.
I reach out my hand to him like so, extinguishing my usual smile and replacing it with a severe look of authority
Look here, it is true! You uniquely honest man, take this. The gods have given you a gift out of my misery. [Offering FLAVIUS gold] Go be rich and happy, but under one condition: you take advantage of other men, hate all of them, curse all of them, and show charity to none of them. Let the starving flesh slide off the bones of a beggar before you give him any money. Give to dogs what you do not give to men, whom you should let go to prison in debt. Let men be like dying woods, with diseases eating at their lying blood. Live this way, and goodbye.
Grumio, my friend!
It's a kind of story.
[To herself] Yes, and in killing my husband and son, you spent much better blood than yours or your brother's.
Master, you spent so much time looking at the girl that you might have missed the heart of the matter here.
Don't tell her what happened to it. I have a use for it. Go on, leave me alone.
You may as well say then that the king sleeps with a beggar if a beggar lives near him, or that the church stands next to your drum if your drum stands next to the church.
I'll have you put in the stocks, you villain!
That thrust would have been quite bad for me indeed, except that my coat is thicker than you realize. Now I'll put your coat to the test.
Whoever it is is carrying a torch! Ill hide in the darkness for a while.
"Katherine the shrew!" Of all the titles you could give a girl, that's the worst.
At what time tomorrow should I send the messenger to you?
They have brought with them someone to come in first, my lord, and whose job it is to tell you all what they want.
What is his name?
My lord, the mayor of London is here to greet you.
He did a good job of sticking that "in a way" in there.
You must have a drink before you go. I think I can welcome you on my son's behalf, and it's likely that some entertainment is being prepared anyway.
And what did the young man say?
It is no lie, sir. Its the truth. And what I said, I said to my face.
What marvelous, beautiful music!
You or any man may get drunk now and then. I'll tell you what to do. Our general's wife is now the one who's actually in charge. What I mean by this is that he is totally devoted to her and obsessed with contemplating and describing her qualities and graces. Apologize to her, and beg her to help you regain your place as lieutenant. She is noble, kind, clever, and blessed. She thinks it is wrong not to do as she is asked. Ask her to help mend your relationship with her husband, andI'll bet anything on itthe friendship between Othello and you will grow stronger now than ever before.
[To himself] I'll tell my lady about this straight away. She won't like anyone attacking CesarioI wouldn't take money to be in some of your shoes.
My Lord Protector Richard insists on it.
Believe me, sir, they butt heads well.
Say your father sent you to greet him and to bring him gifts. I'll write down some instructions for how to behave toward him and will pack all the gifts you'll deliver on your father's behalf. All of it will support your story: that you've come to make peace between him and your father.
Sirs, take up the corpse.
I dreamed that I had broken out of the Tower and was on a ship to France, and my brother Richard was with me. He persuaded me to leave my cabin and walk on the boat's deck with him. From there we looked toward England and reminisced about our many frightening experiences during the wars between the Yorks and the Lancasters. As we paced along the boards of the deck, Richard seemed to stumble, and as I tried to grab him he knocked me overboard into the rolling waves. Oh Lord, how painful it was to drownwith the dreadful noise of water in my ears and the ugly visions of death in my eyes. I seemed to see a thousand shipwrecks; ten thousand men whose bodies had been gnawed by fish; bars of gold; huge anchors; heaps of pearls; and vast amounts of priceless jewels, all scattered on the bottom of the sea. Some of the jewels lay inside of dead men's skulls. And they had crept into their empty eye socketsso that they looked like false eyes. The gems reflected the slimy bottom of the ocean floor, and mocked the dead bones that lay scattered around.
Mistress, what do you mean by that?
My husband!
Welcome, dear nephew, ruler of my thoughts. It seems that the tiring journey has made you sad.
I have some business with the king, sir.
He's always drunk before going to bed. He can't sleep unless he's had something to drink.
May the gods protect you!
My lord, it's nothing so good that it will please you to hear it, but nothing so bad that I can't report it.
Under what's above me. Where do you eat these days, Apemantus?
You do him wrong to joke about his death.
Please tell me, sir, is it possible that love could overpower a person so suddenly?
Rascal, stop that rude, brutish behavior, you wicked friend!
He is healthy.
Oh, it's a verse by Horace, I know it well; I read it in school a long time ago.
I order you to tell me which of your suitors you like best. And make sure you don't lie.
These words do the person who speaks them justice.
Please, he has been putting me off every day for the past month. Please, my master is newly aware of reasons to want his money back, and only asks that your honor will prove consistent and give him what you owe.
No; his ears are filled with other sounds, like flattering praise from his hangers-on (which the young are always happy to hear) and reports of Italian fashions (which our country still shamefully attempts to imitate). When is there some new vanity in the worldfor it's novelty that matters to him, not moralitythat isn't quickly buzzed into his ears? Then advice comes all too late, since his desires are stronger than his willpower. Don't give advice to him, since he only does what he wants: you're already short of breath, so don't waste it on him.
Oh, what a lame, bad punchline! Emilia, don't listen to him, even though he's your husband. What do you think, Cassio? Doesn't he give profane, poor advice?
This news is so inconsistent that it doesn't have any credibility.
I humbly thank you, your Grace. Here is the culprit: this Moor, who it seems your orders have brought here for state business.
Listen, and be a witness.
The taming school? What, is there such a place?
Stop there, stop there.
You gave us the slip, sir, the slip. Do you understand me now?
First kiss me, Kate, and then we will.
Let me see him anyway.
But he's too like the father to ever be good. First hang the child so he can see it die, which is a sight that will distress a father's soul. Get me a ladder.
My liege, one word
Is this the darling of Athens everyone spoke so well of?
Your yellow stockings?
Oh yes, my lord, but only complete nonsense. Even though you were lying here in this nice room, you would talk as if you'd been thrown out of a tavern, and you'd curse at the tavern's hostess, and swear you would take her to court for cheating you out of liquor. Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
[To himself] Don't offer your praise until you've seen the whole performance.
I take it up; and by the sword that knighted me, I'll answer you in any fair fight: and when I mount my horse, may I not get down again alive, if I'm a traitor or fight unjustly!
Well said, Hermione.
And you'll pay well for them.[AUTOLYCUS follows them, singing] Do you want to buy any ribbonsOr lace to decorate your coat,My beautiful girl, my dear?Any silk, any thread,Any hats or bows for your hairOf the newest and best there is?Come to the traveling salesman.Money makes the world go 'roundAnd it's with money that men buy everything.
I wish you feared your wife, too. Then you'd know your children are yours beyond all reasonable doubt.
That she's dead. The Fates aren't nurses; they don't protect our lives forever or even for a while. She died at night; I'll say so. Who would dare to contradict me? Unless you try to play Mr. Innocent and, in a display of honesty, blurt out, "She was murdered!"
What should I swear by?
Cassio has always had good fortune because of your love for him. He and you have faced dangers together.
[Singing]Come now, come now death,And let me be laid in a cypress coffin.Fly away, fly away breath,I've been killed by a fair, cruel girl.My shroud of white, adorned with yew sprigs,Oh, prepare it for me!No one as faithful as IHas ever died like me.Throw no flowers, no sweet flowersUpon my black coffin.Let no friends, no friends seeMy poor corpse, or my scattered bones.Save your thousand sighs of mourning,And bury me, Oh, whereNo sad true lovers can find my grave,To weep there!
Thank you. Im extremely tired. [He falls asleep]
Help! Hey, help, help! Oh, my lady, say something! Sweet Desdemona! Oh, sweet mistress, say something!
What a fuss of bows and butts sticking out, here! I wonder whether their bows are worth the money that you pay for them. Friendship is full of worthless people, and such false people should not have good legs, so that true fools do not give all their wealth for a few curtsies.
It seemed like I did. And I often tried to die, but the jealous waves kept my soul bottled up inside of me, and wouldn't let it go free to find the empty, wandering air. The water kept my soul smothered inside my panting body until I almost burst open.
Why?
Previously, you filled your days by using your own power unchecked, making your own personal desires equivalent with justice. Before now I and people like me slept in the shadow of your power, walking about with folded arms and voicing our opinions only in vain. Now is the time for action, when the bones of those bowing down to you finally cry out, "No more!" Now those supposed wrongdoers, voiceless then, will have the opportunity to sit in your positions of power. And those who were supposedly ill-mannered during your time shall be able to say and do whatever they like.
Where is Cesario going?
Brother, Ill go and bring it to you.
No more of this drowning nonsense, you hear?
Sir, if she gave you as much of her lips as she gives me of her talkative tongue, you'd have had enough.
Well, this is what happens when men are ruled by women. It isn't the king who's sending you to the Towerit's his wife, Lady Elizabeth Grey. She's the one who persuaded him to take such an extreme action. Didn't she and her brother, Anthony Woodeville, make the king send Lord Hastings to the Tower? He was released only today. We are not safe, Clarence. We are not safe.
Oh, please, I beg you, dont work so hard. I wish the lightning had burned up these logs that youve been commanded to stack in a pile! Please, put the log down and rest. When this wood burns, it will cry because it made you tired. My father is hard at work studying. So please, rest. Were safe from my father for the next three hours.
I am all of my father's daughters, and all of his sons tooand yet I'm not certain of that. Sir, should I go see this lady then?
After I have presented my poem to Timon. Let me see your painting.
I beg your pardon, then. I mixed you up with that cunning whore from Venice who married that man Othello. You, madam, must be Saint Peter's diabolical counterpart, the gate-keeper of hell!
Can't Lord Stanley sleep on this long night?
Why, we're really going to make him crazy.
But you're also wrinkled.
Let's say that I didn't kill them.
You look angry, sir.
You are telling the truth.
If you knew why my master needed the money, sir
Yes, sir. Exactly as it's written down.
I swear I'll stay a virgin! Diana, help me!
A pimp! A pimp! A pimp! Thats it!
No, pursue him now, before he exposes the prank and it gets ruined.
[To DORCAS] We can both sing it.[To AUTOLYCUS] If you'll take a part, we can do it, since it has three parts.
Your servant and your friend. One that is waiting to hear your Ladyship's order.
Its not any earlier, I tell you. The lusty hand of the clock is now upon the prick of noon.
Then my lips now have the sin they took from yours.
Yes; please, sing.
A very mean meaning.
I promise you, Im not. I wouldn't risk my reputation for self-control for such a tiny thing. Will you laugh me to sleep? For Im feeling very tired.
[As LUCENTIO] Sir, who are you that you would presume to beat my servant?
A blessed labor, my sovereign lord. If any among this princely group considers me an enemywhether from lies they've heard about me, or because by accident or in anger I've done something to give offenseI want us to be reconciled and become peaceful friends. To be enemies with anyone is like death to me; I hate it, and only desire the love of all good men.
What, for being a Puritan? And what's your far-fetched reason for that, dear knight?
Oh, you stupid Moor!  I found the handkerchief you speak of by chance, and gave it to my husband. For he often eagerly and earnestly begged me to steal it. He was more concerned about it than one would expect for such a little thing.
Not yet.
Stop bothering him. You will find him this way again.
Do that, and tell my beloved to be ready to scold me.
Well done, sir.
Yes, mistress, and Petruchio is the headmaster. He teaches suitable tricks to tame a shrew and her chattering tongue.
Go, do what I say! Get out!
Ceres, I am the messenger that carries the rainbow for Juno, the Queen of the Sky. She commands you to leave behind your rich farmlands of wheat, rye, barley, oats, and peas; the grassy hills where sheep graze and the meadows covered with hay for the sheep to eat in winter; your riverbanks covered in vines and branches that April, on your orders, covers with flowers for virginal nymphs to use to make crowns; your yellow-flowered groves where young men go when they have been rejected by their lovers; your pruned vineyards; your rocky seashore where you yourself fly. Leave all those places, and come to meet the Queen on this grassy spotthis very placeto come and play. The peacocks that draw her chariot approach at full speed.
Go on, I insist.
[Whispering] He'll pick up the scent eventually, no matter how much it smells of a prank.
Why did he call you this?
Did you notice that?
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Just trying to redo what you have undone. I will do that much before I let you go.
Rosalinethat pale-skinned, hard-hearted wenchtorments him so much that hes going to go insane.
That word "judgment" has made me feel a little bit guilty.
Oh, I am miserable and unhappy!
That's what he said.
That's heavy stuff! Heavy stuff! But lookee here, boy. Cross your heartyou came across the dying, and I came across something that's newborn. [He lifts Perdita's blanket out of the basket] Here's a sight for you: look, a blanket for a gentleman's baby! [He pulls out a bag of gold] Lookee here, pick it up now, pick it up, boy, and open it! So, let's see: I've got an idea the fairies have made me rich. This is a changelingopen it. What's it say, boy?
[Standing up] Amen.
Oh yes, I saw the sweet beauty in her face, just like that of Europa, the daughter of Agenorbeauty that made even the great god Jove fall in love and humble himself, falling to his knees and kissing the ground on that beach in Crete.
How do you like this portrait, Apemantus?
Please stop.
How are you, Cassio? What's going on with you?
Oh, my poor father! The spies have found us, and now we won't get to celebrate our wedding.
Yes?
Oh, nicely done, Lucius! Good boy, in Virgo's lap; give it to Pallas.
Oh, true, good Catesby. Tell him to gather the largest army he can in a hurry, and meet me at Salisbury right away.
I'll tell you about it later. Let's eat now.
I want to work among honest women.
I trust you. Walk down to the sea; I'll follow you from behind.
But how did you want it to be made?
But you'll still be hanged for being gone so long. Or at least fired and kicked out, and wouldn't that be just as bad for you?
[To OLIVIA] Don't be shocked. His blood is pure and noble. If all this is true, as the two really seem to be brother and sister, then I too will share in the spoils of this lucky shipwreck. [To VIOLA] Boy, you've said to me a thousand times that you'd never love a woman like you love me.
Okay. What, then?
Never.
Do that, and in two days I will give you your freedom.
What incredible thing will he do next as if it was nothing?
No, heaven forbid! Gentlemen, give me some light so I can bind the wound with my shirt.
[Reads from an official document] Hermione, Queen of Sicily and wife of King Leontes: you are here accused and called to account for high treason, for committing adultery with Polixenes, King of Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo to assassinate your husband the king. By nature of the circumstances, you are also charged with aiding and abetting the fugitives to their escape, which violates the trust and duty of a true subject.
I believe it, and would even believe it if an oracle said otherwise.
[To JULIA] Is your name Sebastian? I like you, and so I'll give you a job to do soon.
Fight, sir? No, sir.
Padua can afford this pleasant lifestyle, my son Petruchio.
[To the SHEPHERD] "Advocate" is court-speak for "pheasant;" say you don't have one.
If she is unattractive, but has some wits, she'll find a man suitable for her appearance.
There's some kind of evil in the air. I'll have to be patient until this all clears up. Listen, everyone: unlike most women, I'm not one to cry, and the fact that I'm not shedding a tear might lead you not to pity me. But I promise you that my heart is hurting more right now than tears could show. I'm begging you, all of you, to think clearly, see me clearly, and help the king to do the right thing!
[To himself] Simonides!
I remember that Henry the Sixth prophesied that Richmond would be king one day, when Richmond was only a foolish boy. A king, perhaps
Oh, I had a miserable night last night. It was so full of ugly dreams and terrifying visions that I swear I wouldn't choose to spend another night like iteven if it bought me a lifetime of happy days.
Two weeks and a few odd days.
I think I can find him, if you want to get some strong, armed men together and come along with me.
You're mistaken, sir, you're mistaken. Please tell me, what do you think his name is?
You often scolded me for loving Rosaline.
Listen to me. Stop thinking about her.
It's been a while. How is everything in your world?
Though the bad luck you've experienced has hurt you the most, we feel your pain, too.
I'd love to know what happened next.
Yes, good fool.
By God! Who's there?
It won't help you to try to make us feel sorry for you. After our sentence has been handed down, it's too late to complain.
It will be royal fun, I promise you. I know my medicine will work on him. You two will hide, along with the Fool, in the place where I'll leave the letter. Then you can observe how he interprets it. But for tonight, it's time to go to bed and dream about this plan. Farewell.
No, either tell me where you've been, or I won't say a word in your defense. My lady Olivia will have you hanged for being absent.
If he's gullible and believes my story, then I'll make him happy to pretend to be Vincentio and vouch for you to Baptista Minola, just as if he were the real Vincentio. Take your sweetheart and leave this to me.
We have to obey the gods above. I can rage as loud as the sea and it won't bring Thaisa back. I named our daughter Marina because she was born at sea. Please, I'm asking a favor: I'm leaving the baby in your care. Make sure she has an education fit for a princess, so she grows up to be as cultivated as her pedigree.
What's the matter?
His hatred of mankind is what gives us advice, not his concern for our craft.
[To SEBASTIAN] Ha, ha, ha!
What do you mean by "removal?"
I am; so come down and welcome me.
Where are you, jailer? Give me a cup of wine.
Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babesmy flowers who didn't have a chance to bloom! If your gentle souls are still flying about in the air and haven't yet landed in their final resting place, then hover about me now with your airy wings, and hear your mother's cries of mourning.
Only from my kind uncle. I know he'll give it to me, and it's not valuable, so it shouldn't make him sad to lose it.
And we're with you, whatever happens.
Hic ibat, as I told you before, Simois, I am Lucentio, hic est, son of Vincentio of Pisa, Sigeia tellus, disguised like this to win your love. Hic steterat, and the other "Lucentio" who comes to woo you, Priami, is my servant Tranio, regia, pretending to be me, celsa senis, so we can trick the foolish old Gremio.
What do you think of this fool, Malvolio? Hasn't he gotten better?
Here's the wine.
Welcome, my lord. What's the news?
And wasn't my husband the bigger troublemaker out of you two?
I'll believe every word you say. But let me ask: how did you get here? Where were you born?
His words are so passionate that he must believe what he's saying. But I can hardly believe it. Please be true, imagination, oh please be truelet it be true that I've been mistaken for you, my dear brother!
It would be very difficult, I think, to arrange it so you could watch the two of them sleep together. They'd be damned if anyone else saw them having sex. So, what now? What should we do? What should I say? How could you be satisfied that you know the truth? It is impossible that you should see them in the act, even if they were frisky as goats, monkeys, or wolves in heat, as lustful as drunk idiots. But nonetheless, I tell you, if you would be satisfied to find strong circumstantial evidence pointing to the truth, you could then find such satisfaction.
My master's behavior in his passion for you is the same as yours in your passion for me.
Wait, now, who does the title, "fool," attend now?
Oh, do you read, my lord, what shes written? "Rape. Chiron. Demetrius."
Before you do that, this sword will tear out your bowels.
If I could, I'd spend nine years killing him slowly. She was a fine woman! A beautiful woman! A sweet woman!
It is, my lord. Everything's ready.
Good aunt, stand up.
The old rooster, Gonzalo.
No, don't misunderstand meI'm just stating the facts. Where are you from, sir? What name should I call you?
God is just, and he rewards the innocent.
He should be ashamed for sending it to me, because I have heard him say a thousand times that his Julia gave him this ring when they said goodbye. Though his false finger has abused the ring, my finger will not do his Julia so much wrong by wearing the ring.
That request is like giving me a dog, and as payment asking for the dog back.
Probably some noble gentleman on a journey, who wants to stop and rest here.
[To himself] The real Duke of Milan and his even finer daughter could control you right now, if now were the right time to do it. Theyve fallen in love at first sight! [To ARIEL] Beautiful Ariel, Ill set you free for making this happen.[To FERDINAND] May I speak with you, sir? Im afraid youve may have said something untrue. It wont take more than a moment.
She's looking really pregnant all of a sudden. She'll go into labor soon!
I think she means that there was more than one who did this; yes, there was more than one. Unless shes praying to heaven for revenge.
See, the clock scolds me for wasting time. Don't worry, youth, I won't keep pursuing you. And when you're older and wiser, your future wife will have a fine handsome husband. There's your way back home, due west.
I'll do my best, sir.
So we hear that the Welshmen have  abandoned him, and Salisbury went to meet the king, who recently landed with a few close friends upon this coast.
You won't pay for the glasses you've broken?
Where is he?
Youve often started to tell me who I am. But then you would stop, leaving me asking questions that you wouldn't answer until you would finally say, Wait. Not yet.
Petruchio is my name. My father was Antonio, a man well known throughout Italy.
Yes, you should spend your life trying to get yourself out of any trouble that might lead to the hangmans collar.
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool, and to do that well you have to be clever. He has to pay attention to the mood and status of the person he's mocking, the time, and must also pursue every target he sees. This is a skill that requires just as much work as any wise man's job, for he plays the fool very wisely. Wise men, on the other hand, ruin their reputation for intelligence when they try to play the fool.
Im sorry, good Mercutio. My business was so important that I must be forgiven for stretching good manners and courtesy.
What a nice trick! See how the young folks put their heads together to deceive the old.
Yep, I was born a gentleman about four hours ago!
Look at me, the women who was once the object of all your promises. I received them deeply in my heart. How often have you split the bottom of my heart when you broke a promise! Oh, Proteus, let my outfit make you blush! Be ashamed that I have been wearing such immodest clothingif it can be shameful to wear a disguise for the sake of love. It's much more appropriate and a lesser fault for women to be deceptive in their appearance than for men to be deceptive in their love.
Go with me to the tomb.
You harpy! You use your beautiful face to get away with evil.
[Whispering] Damn, go hang yourself, you badger!
Is this really happening?
Yes, sir.
How much money do I get?
Nobody. I did it to myself. Farewell. Send my love to my kind lord. Oh, farewell!
Well, sir, in conclusion, the gown is not for me.
No indeed, sir, the Lady Olivia has no foolishness. She won't keep a fool until she gets married. Fools are to husbands as anchovies are to sardineshusbands are the larger version. I'm not her fool, just her corrupter of words.
It's unnatural to want to take revenge on the man who loves you.
None, my man. They'd do nothing. Theyd all be whores and scoundrels.
The most heavenly music! I can't stop listening; and it's making me sleepy. Let me rest.
We just miss your mother to say "amen."
How's it going, old boy?
You are very sensible, but you mistook my meaning: I meant that Hortensio is afraid of you.
The woman I told you about, our great captain's captain, left under bold Iago's watch. She's come here seven days earlier than I expected. May Jove guard Othello and send his ship quickly here, so that he may bless us with his arrival, embrace Desdemona in love, and rekindle the fire in our spirits, bringing comfort to all of Cyprus.
Heaven knows the truth.
Calm down, Petruchio. I'll vouch for Grumio. Why, this is sad to see you two fightingyou and Grumio, your trusty, cheerful servant of many years. But tell me now, sweet friend, what lucky wind blew you from old Verona here to Padua.
[To GONZALO] Please, stop.
Come on, get moving, get moving, get moving! The second rooster has crowed. The curfew-bell has rung. Its three oclock. Go get the baked meats, good Angelica. Dont worry about the cost.
Andlike a traitor to the name of Godyou broke that vow, and with your treacherous sword you ripped open the chest of your king, Henry's, son Edward.
Oh, wait! The statue was just painted and it's not dry yet. [LEONTES begins to cry]
Show me a villain that's raped someone, and I'm here to take revenge on him.
I always do.
But my hair still suits me well enough, doesn't it?
I'm surprised, but happy to see that you made it here before me. Oh, my soul is overjoyed! If this is my reward for every sea-storm, then let the winds rage and blow all they can, and let my ships have to climb up mountainous waves and drop down from their crests as if falling from heaven to hell! If I were to die now, I'd die at my happiest moment. I don't think my soul will ever be as happy as this again.
Let me discuss your situation with you.
There's a lot you would do. What rank are your parents?
[To RATCLIFFE] You'll live to regret this later.
You said you'd be my boyfriend.
I'll be here, right by your side. Be bold, and make a stand.
What does she say about my bravery?
I'll do whatever you'd like, if I can.
Yes, it is, I promise. Just read it.
What! This gentleman will out-talk us all.
I am in love. But the one I love does not love me back.
Sorry, sir, I dont know Jupiter; Ive never had a drink with him in my life.
Then they're cold friends to me. What are they doing in the north when they should be serving their king in the west?
[Drawing a large circle on the stage with his staff] All you elves of hills, streams, lakes, and forests; and you elves who leave no footprints on the sand, chasing the ocean waves as they draw down the beach and running from those same waves when they come back; you puppet-sized creatures that by the light of the moon make fairy-rings in the grass, which a sheep will refuse to eat; and you who like to make mushrooms at midnight, and who celebrate when you hear the bells signaling the arrival of nightwith your help (though none of you are powerful) I've darkened the noon sun, summoned the rebellious winds, and made the green sea and blue sky war against each other. I've shot off the dreadful rumbling thunderbolt, and burned up Jupiter's strong oak with his own lightning. I've made the sturdy cliffs shake, and pulled up pine and cedar trees by the roots. With my strong magic, I've woken the dead and opened their graves to let them out. But now I reject this wild magic. And after I have conjured some heavenly musicas Im doing nowto achieve my goal of affecting the senses of those at whom I aim my spell, Ill break my staff. Then I'll bury it deep underground, and throw my book of magic into the sea so that it sinks farther than any anchor has ever reached.
By Saint Paul, that is bad news indeed. Oh, the king has kept many bad habits all his life, and now they've consumed his health. It's very sad to think about. Where is he, in his bed?
I know you are now, sir, born a gentleman.
Romeo can be, though God is not. Oh, Romeo, Romeo! Who ever would have guessed? Romeo!
If you do that, I'll never love you again. Why would you do such a thing, you silly gentleman?
Truly sir, don't say sounless you want to be one of my friends.
He wont be a part of it; well keep him here. Then what is that to him?
Oh, you're sick with vanity, Malvolio, and it affects your good taste. If you were generous, innocent, and friendly, then you wouldn't make such mountains out of mole-hills. There's no real harm in a professional fool, even if he does nothing but mock people. In the same way there's no real mockery in a wise man, even if he does nothing but criticize people.
Id bet fourteen of my teethbut, to be honest, I actually only have four teeththat shes not fourteen. How long is it until August 1st?
Come, let's leave her. May the gods help her!
[To STEPHANO and TRINCULO] Go, and return that trash you're wearing to where you found it.
And until she comes, I'll tell you the story of how Desdemona and I fell in love as truthfully as I confess my sins to God.
Perfect, Sir Topas!
Master, now's not the time to scold you. Affection can't be driven out of the heart. If love has really touched you, then there's only one thing to be done. As the Latin grammar book says, "Ransom yourself from captivity as cheaply as you can."
Oh, is that it? What will you give me now for the handkerchief itself?
Will you go to dinner with her?
And you too, good sister-in-law. Where are you off to?
[Waking up] Why, whats happening? Hey, wake up!
[Singing]I wont build any more dams to catch you fish,Whenever you want,Or scrape clean the platters, or wash dishes.'Ban, 'Ban, Ca-CalibanHas a new master. Get yourself a new servant.Freedom, hooray, hooray, freedom, freedom, hooray, freedom!
Is the handkerchief lost? Is it gone? Tell me, have you lost it?
[To CHIRON and DEMETRIUS] Since hes crazy, Ill just keep agreeing with him. Whatever I come up with, just support my story in whatever you sayfor now he thinks Im Revenge. And, since hell be easy to deceive now, Ill make him bring his son Lucius to his house. And during the banquet, Ill find some cunning way to destroy the Goth army, or at least to make them turn against him. Look, here he comes; I have to keep this up.
[As LUCENTIO] No, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's own mother.
She's just what you want after a long voyage at sea. [He gives the BAWD a coin] Well, there you go. Leave us.
You have. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.
Oh, do not slander him, for he is a kind man.
This will be a splendid kingdom for me to rule. I'll get music played to me for free.
What do you want me to do? Fight in the war, huh? Where a man might serve seven years before he loses a leg, and then not have enough money to buy a wooden one?
Me neither.
We'll both draw our swords. When I raise my sword, you do the same, and bring it down to kill Gonzalo.
[She hands SILVIA a letter] Madam, please read this letterWait! Pardon me, madam. I have accidentally given you a paper that I shouldn't have. [She hands SILVIA another letter] This is the letter addressed to your Ladyship.
It is a crazy world indeed, my lord. And I believe it will never stand upright again until Richard wears the garland of the realm.
Tell us more with more gold. We'll do anything for gold!
This can't be true. It makes no sense. It must be a trick, to draw our attention in the wrong direction. Think about how important Cyprus is to the Turks, and think how much more the Turks care about Cyprus than Rhodes. And also consider that they can take over Cyprus more easily than Rhodes, since it doesn't have the same military defenses that Rhodes has. Considering all this, we cannot think that the Turks would be so foolish as to leave Cyprus for later when it would be easiest to take first. They wouldn't neglect an easy, profitable mission to undertake a dangerous one that wouldn't benefit them as much.
[Kneels]May my knees grow into the earth and my tongue stick to roof of my mouth, unless you pardon me before I stand up or speak.
Yes, yes.
The oracle is complete garbage. The trial will proceed. This is a pack of lies.
I thank you, madam, that you care for her. Poor gentlewoman! My master has really wronged her.
Enough, enough.
You may have heard that, but you must be somewhat hard of hearing then. Those who talk about me call me Katherine.
Just do it. And quickly. I will walk around. I would not want to kill you when you haven't prepared your soul by confessing and repenting. No, heaven forbid it, I would not send your soul to hell.
If you don't mind, I'll leave my flag-bearer behind for the task. He is an honest, trustworthy man, and I'll let him bring my wife to Cyprus, along with whatever else your good grace thinks I might need.
My dearest father, if you used your magic to incite the wild waters into this this awful storm, please calm them. The sky is so dark it seems like it would rain down hot tar, except that the sea is swelling up to the sky and would put out the fire boiling the tar. Oh, I've suffered along with all of those I saw suffering onboard the ship! A magnificent shipwhich carried, without a doubt, some noble peoplewas smashed to pieces. Oh, their cries shook my heart! Those poor peoplethey died. If I were a god with even a bit of power I would have forced the sea to sink down into the earth before it could have swallowed up that ship and all the people it carried.
She was, good Curtis, before this frost. But you know how winter tames man, woman, and beastand so it's tamed my old master, my new mistress, and myself, good colleague Curtis.
And that's harm?
So, Prince of Tyre: you understand how dangerous the task you're about to attempt is?
As for him, I don't think about him. And as for his thoughts, I wish that they were blank pages instead of filled with pictures of me.
But he is your servant, so all that he has is yours too. Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
I don't know, madam.
It's truly beautifulyour red lips and white skin painted by Nature's sweet and skillful hand. My lady, you are the cruelest woman alive if you'll let your beauty go with you to the grave, instead of having children and passing it on.
[To his men] Follow me closely. Ill speak to them.
I'm glad he's coming, however he might be dressed.
The loss can never be repaired, and patiently waiting for the pain to fade is not going to work.
He's a coward, a true coward, religiously devoted to his cowardice.
What do you want, my lordexcept for the one thing you cannot havethat I can help you with? Cesario, you broke your promise to me.
Wait, officer. He won't go to prison.
I hope Lady Luck is on our side!
Get up, good aunt.
But not better than mine.
That honorable day will never be seen. Since his banishment, Norfolk has been fighting for Jesus Christ in the Holy Land; afterwards, he retired to Italy and died in Venice, surrendering his pure soul to his captain Christ, under whose flag he had fought for so long.
He hasn't arrived yet. And I don't know anything, but I'm sure he's all right and will be here soon
So far you havent hurt me much. You will soon, though, I can tell by your trembling. Prospero made you do this.
And they never sent you away?
Error in the bill, sir, error in the bill! I said that the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and I'll prove it by defeating you in combat, even if your little finger is armed with a thimble.
I hope you'll pardon me: I can't walk these streets without being in danger. Once in a battle at sea I served on the side fighting against Duke Orsino's ships, and I distinguished myself enough that I might be recognized. If I were arrested here, they'd make me answer for my deeds.
It's thought the king is dead; we will not wait. The bay-trees in our country are all withered, and meteors disturb the fixed stars in the sky; the pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth; and frightened prophets whisper of fearful change. Rich men look sad and poor men dance and leap, the one fearing to lose what they enjoy, the other looking forward to enjoying the spoils of war: these signs predict the death or fall of kings. Farewell, our countrymen are as surely gone as Richard is dead.
I've heard people say that engineering their multicoloredness is "playing God."
And ours.
Do you think so?
Here comes the little villain.
Just a minute, shepherd. Do you have a father?
God be with you. I'm finished with my business. If you please, your Grace, you can move on to the state affairs. I'd rather adopt a child than father my own. Come here, Moor. I now give you with all my heart my daughter, whom I'd keep from you with all my heart if you didn't already have her. For your sake, precious Desdemona, I am glad that I don't have another daughter. For what you have done would make me a tyrannical parent, and I'd lock her up like a prisoner. [To the DUKE] I'm done with my business, my lord.
Then she cursed Richard, then she cursed Buckingham, and then she cursed Hastings. Oh, God, remember to hear her prayer and punish them as you now punish us! But, dear God, please be satisfied with our bloodwhich is being unjustly spilledand don't punish my sister and her princely sons.
Alas, why would you heap this responsibility on me? I am unfit for power and majesty. Don't take this the wrong way, but I cannot and will not give in to you.
Have I ever seen two such honest men?
You've got the right idea. [To MALVOLIO] Go rub your steward's chain in some crumbs, sir. Maria, bring us more wine!
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and everything.
Everything's ready. How far away is our master?
With all my heart, I will.
[To MARIA] Please, keep quiet. This isn't the way to go about it. Don't you see that you're making him upset? Leave me alone with him.
Hear me, you scheming pirates, who quarrel over what you've plundered from me! Which of you doesn't tremble to look at me? If you're not trembling because I am the queen and you are my bowing subjects, then you're quivering because you're traitors who stole my throne!
Come on, captain, will you go now?
Certainly. Let our catch be "You Villain."
Are you really jealous of me because of him? You must be jokingand now I can see that you've been joking with me this whole time. Please, sister Kate, untie my hands.
But there is one man who loves you better than your husband could.
Did Cassio confess to it?
Good man, speak to the sailors to get them working harder. Do it quickly, or were going to be shipwrecked. Move, move!
I will chop her up into little bits! Cheat on me, will she?
Come on, lets knock and go inside. And once inside, lets all start dancing.
Perdita, please don't ruin the party by worrying. I belong to you, sweetheart, not my father. I'm nothing to myself and the world if I don't have youI swear I mean it, despite all the odds. Be happy, relax, and get rid of all these negative thoughts. Your guests are coming! Smile like today's the wedding day we've been planning.
Night and day I get no rest. I'm handling this the way I am because I'm weak, just weak. If only the problem weren't her as a personI can't isolate the problem or cut it out, because it's her; she's unfaithful. Polixenes is beyond my reach, out of sight and out of mind, irrelevant. But Hermione is here and within my power. If she died, say, in a fire, I might be able to sleep at night. Who's there?
The advancement of your children, noble lady.
The accuser greets your highness with all loyalty and respect, desiring to kiss your hand and say goodbye.
No one here is under your curse either. For curses are just empty words, lost to the air as soon as they're spoken.
Sir, our ship has come from Tyre, and the king is onboard. For the past three months he hasn't spoken to anyone and he's refused to eat anything more than what he needs to prolong his grieving.
If it please you! Why, I assure you, Lucius, you'll be enraged when you hear what I have to say, for I'll reveal murders, rapes, and massacres; acts committed under cover of night; horrible deeds; treasonous plots; and villainous deeds which would make you have pity when you hear them, but were performed without pity. And all this will be buried with me when I die, unless you promise to me that my child will live.
Wait, I will go with you.
Now it's my turn to speak. Look at this child:
Yes my lord, here is a note stating your debts.
That's enough.
Your handkerchief is too small. Leave it alone.
What's going on? What are you doing here alone?
Look how he's laughing already!
Indeed, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Go get it, then. Let me see it.
Your grief is only your absence for a time.
Linen as white as snow,Cotton black as a crow,Sweet-smelling gloves,Masks for your face,Beaded bracelets, gemstone necklaces,Perfume for ladies' bedrooms,Golden hairpieces and beltsFor young men to give their girlfriends,Steel pins and clipsFor ladies that need them:Come buy from me; come buy, come buy,Boys, buy up, or your girlfriends will be sad. Come buy!
Out of their saddles and into the dirt. But that's a long story.
Sir, you've done enough; you've grieved enough. You've redeemed every one of your sins. You've done more penitence than you did wrong. For the last time: do what God does. Forget what your evil actions and forgive yourself.
For he fears nothing.
Oh, blessed, blessed night! Because its night, Im scared that all this is a dream. It is too wonderful to be real.
What's happening? Is death coming for me? Villain, I'll take the weapon that would kill me from your own hands.
Dont be afraid that you will have to see her. I met Venus as she was flying with her son in a carriage pulled by doves through the sky towards her home on the island of Paphos. They had been planning to put a magic spell upon this man and woman. The spell would have made them break their vow that they would not sleep together until Hymen's torch was lit on their wedding day. Venus, that lustful wife of Mars, has returned home again. And hot-headed Cupid has broken all his arrows. He swears he will never shoot them again, and will instead play with sparrows like a regular boy.
Go away! Dont grab my clothes.
[To himself] By Jove, king of thoughts: I can hardly eat this delicious food; I can't stop thinking about a certain girl.
[As LUCENTIO] Gremio, it's well known that my father has no fewer than three great merchant ships, along with two large galleys and twelve smaller ones. I'll offer all these to Bianca, and I'll double whatever you might offer next.
Thanks, ma'am.
I won't try it, then. You're Camillo, right?
I beg you: remember that Ive done good work for you. Ive never lied to you. I've made no mistakes. And I've served you without bitterness or grumbling. You promised to shorten my time to serve you by a full year.
You're right. Of course, we've brought up some bastards . . . I've brought up at least eleven, I think
Hello, gentleman.
A prince of Macedon, sir. His design shows a knight being conquered by a lady. The motto, in Spanish, is "Better by sweetness than by force."
Your love says, like an honorable, courteous, kind, handsome, and, I believe, virtuous gentleman  where is your mother?
Come, come, that's enough. The duke wants to eat his dinner. Make a quick confession. He's eager to see your head.
[Referring to TIMANDRA and PHRYNIA] Like your good times now with these whores.
Then wherever he goes, let me go with him.
Didn't you hear what the king said: "Don't I have a friend that will rid me of this living fear?" Didn't he say so?
I swear, the fool has an excellent voice. I would give forty shillings to have legs like his and his beautiful singing voice. [To the FOOL] Truly, that was some elegant fooling last night when you spoke that astrological nonsense about Pigrogromitus, and the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus. It was very funny, really. I sent you some money to spend on your sweetheart. Did you get it?
Well, my lord, if a large group goes, the newly-healed hostilities between us might break out again. This could be very dangerous, as the Yorkist rule is still new and untested. We should prevent a situation where it seems like every man is out for himself, with everyone paranoid about imagined enemies.
Do it, I say, and begin with her.
You can't help it? A lie! It's all up to you. Our bodies are like gardens, and our willpower is the gardener. We can have all sorts of different plants in the garden, but whether they grow well or not is up to our will. If we didn't have an ounce of reason to counterbalance our passions, our base urges would make us ridiculous. But we have rationality to cool our raging emotions, carnal desires, and uncontrollable lust. And what you call love is just an offshoot of this kind of lust.
Why, this kingEdward's sonhas uncles too, on both his father's and his mother's side.
[As LITIO] If I look pale, it must be from fear.
Yes, I had forgotten. Aren't I the king? Wake up, cowardly majesty! You've been sleeping. Isn't the king's name worth twenty thousand names? Take up arms and fight for me, my name! A puny subject threatens your great glory. Don't look at the ground, my friends; aren't you raised high, as favorites of a king? Our thoughts should be positive too; I know my uncle York has an army large enough to fight for us. But who's here now?
What satisfaction could you have tonight?
Oh, poor Richard! Where did he ride?
Get up. Someones knocking. Hide, good Romeo.
I'd be glad to hear you ask me to stay. But I cannot stay, no matter how much you plead with me.
Didn't you say he was coming?
If I may ask, gentleman, please come back some other time, and it will help me a great deal. I swear, Timon is extremely upset. His cheerful disposition is gone, he is sick, and he keeps to his room.
I don't know, but it's probably safer to get out of the way than it is to stand around and debate about how it got started. If you trust me, pack your things and leave tonight. I'll whisper the plan to your servants and we'll leave the city in groups of two or three, all by different gates. From this point on, I offer my services to you, considering I'll be dead if I'm found here after you're gone. I swear on my parents' lives that everything I've told you is true. If you want to test it on Leontes, you better believe I won't stick aroundyou'll be as condemned to die as a criminal sitting on death row.
I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you began to look for him. I am the youngest man by that name, because there is none younger or worse.
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas, what a terrible day!
You've faced a loss like mine?
Sir, I swear on my life that the queen is innocent; I'd even die to defend it if you'd accept my sacrifice. I mean, she's innocent of what you've accused her.
I'm angrier about losing them than I am about having gotten wet. Yet you said the spirit was harmless, monster.
Business is your god, and your god will ruin you.
[Interrupting] If only all these fat men here were your enemies, then you might kill them and bring them to me.
No, my letters will get there before you arrive and will clear up any doubt.
Will it prove I'm your daughter if I say my mother's name was Thaisa? Thaisa was my mother, and she died as soon as I was born.
Good luck with your wooing. May you be successful. But be ready for some unpleasant words.
[To the SHEPHERD'S SON] Sir, there's a traveling salesman at the door who can play the drums and the flute better than anyone I've ever seen. He knows all sorts of songshe can sing any ballad you can think of.
Do you remember me saying that, when I left Tyre, I left an old friend behind? Do you remember his name? I've mentioned it many times.
Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave. Don't be afraid. He has an honorable mind, and won't mistreat a woman.
Make your peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
Come on, let's do that. Every minute we expect more ships to come in.
I see that sweet love easily turns to the most deadly hate. Uncurse their souls; their peace is made by losing their heads, not with a handshake; the men you curse are dead in the ground for you.
It is a pretty good imitation of life. Here is a nice touch, do you like it?
Thats true, which is why women, being the weaker sex, get thrust up against the wall. So Ill push Montagues men into the gutter, and thrust Montague women against the wall.
As I recall, he can't be far from here.
It's a messenger from the ship.
I beg you here on my kneestell me, what do you mean by your speech? I can see that you are angry, but I don't understand what you mean.
[Whispering] And doesn't Toby give you a punch in the mouth then?
Her lips were precious, and you should consider yourself lucky they ever kissed you.
No, he can't know.
A toast, to the health of our general!
Promise me your friendship, but don't do anything that would make you seem like my friend. That way, whether you refuse or keep this promise, and whether you follow through or not, the gods may damn you, because you are like all these other men!
Yes, I understand.
[Giving him a coin] You won't be worse off because of me: here's some gold.
Well, let's leave them for the moment.
My heart jumps at the thought of being able to hug my own mother.
Get up, please. I didn't come to be worshipped. All I ask is a place for myself, my ships, and my men to stay.
Why, there's no crab apple here, so don't look sour.
Sad, my lady! I could be sad. These crossed laces do cut off the circulation in my legs a bit, but what of that? If a certain person likes them, then it's like that poem says: "Please one, and please all."
Sweet lady, hello.
How are you, my lord? Let me lick your shoe. [He points to TRINCULO] I wont serve him. Hes not brave the way you are.
Not afraid to kill him, since we have a warrant for it. But I'm afraid to be damned for killing him. No warrant can protect me from that.
Good fool, please help me find a candle and some paper. I tell you, I'm as sane as any man in Illyria.
God save your grace! I beg you to give me some time to talk to you alone.
[To BIONDELLO] Come here, you villain.
She was tricked, divorced, wronged, spited, killed! Detestable Death tricked her. Cruel, cruel Death murdered her. Oh love! Oh life! There is no life because my love is dead.
No, no, not at all. Ive stayed up all night before for less important reasons, and never gotten sick from it.
Good morning, gentlemen.
No, I'll never believe a madman until he's dead and I can see his brains. But I'll bring you a candle, and paper, and ink.
[To the devil "possessing" MALVOLIO] Yes, little chicken, come with me. [To MALVOLIO] What, man! You're too serious to play games with Satan. Damn him, that dirty coal miner devil!
If that shepherd isn't in jail already, he better run for it. The punishment he faces will be enough to break any man.
Oh, you poor cold corpse of a holy king, you last remains of the house of Lancaster, you bloodless remnant of that royal blood! If it's lawful to speak to your ghost, then listen to the sorrows of poor Anne. My husband was Edwardyour slaughtered sonwho was murdered by the same man who stabbed you. Oh, let me pour my helpless tears into your wounds, those open windows that let your spirit escape. I curse the hand that made these holes in you. I curse the heart of the person who had the heart to do it. And I curse the blood of the man that shed your blood. I hope evil fortunes fall upon that hateful man, the one who killed you and now makes me suffer. May his fate be worse than anything I would wish on wolves, spiders, toads, or any creeping venomous thing that lives. If he ever has a child, may it be born premature and unnatural, and may its appearance be so ugly and monstrous that even its own hopeful mother will fear it. That way, the child will inherit your murderer's own unhappiness. And if he ever has a wife, may she be more miserable at his death than I am now, mourning my husband and you, my father-in-law.
How can love, which is supposed to be blind, force you to be able to do what it wants? Where should we eat? [Noticing blood] Oh my goodness, what fighting happened here? No, dont tell me. I already know: it was something that had a lot to do with hate, but even more to do with love. Oh, fighting love! Oh, loving hate! Oh, love that originates from nothing! Oh heavy lightness! Serious frivolity! Beautiful shapes smashed together to create an ugly chaos! Love is like heavy feathers, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health, waking sleep, the opposite of what it is! Thats the love I feel, since no one loves me in return. Are you laughing?
Bring Richard here, so that he may surrender the crown in front of everyonethus, we can proceed without anyone suspecting us of double-dealing.
What, will you scorn me for my friendly advice, and comfort the devil that I'm warning you about? Oh, you will remember this, when one day he splits your heart in two with sorrow. Then you'll say that poor Margaret was a prophet. May Richard come to hate everyone here, and may you come to hate him, and may God hate you all!
Camillo, she's so far beyond her lower-class origins; she's basically as noble as you and I.
But I can give you more. Ill raise a golden statue of her. So long as this city is called Verona, there will be no figure praised more than that of true and faithful Juliet.
My gracious king, my friends have informed me that Sir Edward Courtney and his elder brotherthe arrogant Bishop of Exeterare now in Devonshire with an army.
No, I won't do anything you ask me to do: go ask that of your friend.
Well said.
It's better to be blunt than to be long-winded, sir.
You're all liars.
And such an act of despair would be a worthy act of revenge against yourself for slaughtering innocents.
Look, your guests are coming. Try to have fun with them; let's all have a good time.
Well, let God give wisdom to those who have it. Everyone has their talents, and for those of us who are fools, let us use our gifts.
Please, sir, who is he?
The clock has just barely struck nine.
Was ever a match agreed upon so suddenly?
Yes I am sure of it.
Can this be possible, my lord?
You'd be glad to stay?
He was playing the role of being the duke. But to get rid of the last thing separating the role he was playing from who he was, he had to become the actual Duke of Milan. As for mepoor fool that I wasmy library was as large a dukedom as I wanted. Having decided that I was unable to run or rule my city, he become so thirsty for power that he secretly allied with the King of Naples to get rid of me. In return, Antonio agreed to pay the King of Naples a certain amount of money every year; to swear to obey him; and to force his dukedom, which had always been independentoh, poor Milan!into the shameful position of being under Naples control.
You're a master of music.
Is that not him?
Neither will I.
Retreat from the fighting, my lord. I'll help you get to a horse.
He's staying here longer.
Give me the letter. Ill read it. [He takes the letter from BALTHASAR] Where is the counts page, who called the watch? Boy, what was your master doing here?
Well then, he must be alive.
It is a thousand times worse to leave you. A lover goes toward his beloved as joyfully as a schoolboy leaving his books. But when a lover leaves his beloved, he is as unhappy as a schoolboy on his way to school.
What, what? No, for then I'd have to spill an ounce or two of your impudent blood.
Please, let him know.
Stop, sir, or I'll throw your dagger over the roof.
Sir, our house, which overlooks the sea, shook in the earthquake. It seemed like the foundation itself was breaking and that the whole building would split in two! It scared us enough that we left quickly.
No.
Oh, Im not acting like myself. Its as if Im not even here. This is not Romeo, hes somewhere else.
Yes, yes. A scratch, just a scratch. Yet its enough. Where is my page? Go, villain. Get a doctor.
Not me. I must let them find me. My qualities, my title and legal right to Desdemona as her husband, and my clear conscience will show for all to see. Is that them?
You see how well loved you are my lord?
It is not very well, I tell you. I will tell everything to Desdemona. If she will return my jewels, I will give up on courting her and take back my unlawful advances. If she doesn't, I'll seek repayment from you.
You remain stone-faced when fools' eyes drop tears. I like you lads. Go about your business right away. Go, go, get to it.
I would have been happy if the whole camp of soldiers, trench-diggers and all, had tasted her sweet body, if only I didn't know about it. Oh, now I can say farewell to a peaceful mind! Farewell to being content! Farewell to the soldiers in uniform and the big wars that allow me to fulfill my ambitions! Oh, farewell! Farewell the neighing horses and the shrill war trumpets, the war drums that stir the spirit, the ear-piercing flute, the royal banners, pride, the pomp and circumstance, and everything else that's good about war! And you deadly cannons, whose rude blasts are as loud as Jove's thunderbolts, farewell! Othello's military career is finished.
My lord
But I'll laugh at all this in a year, and rejoice that I could see tragedy come to those who once convinced King Edward to hate me. Well, Catesby, before two weeks have passed I'll send some people packing who won't be expecting it at all.
[To himself, reading the letter] What does this say? She says in this letter that she loves me! Maybe this is the king's plot to kill me? [To SIMONIDES] Oh, please don't try to trap me, sir. I'm just an unlucky stranger and a gentleman in distress. I never wanted to marry your daughter; I just wanted to do my best to honor her.
Look out, Moor, and keep an eye on her. She has deceived her father, and may deceive you.
What did our cousin say when you left him?
Exton, I don't thank you; for you have done a scandalous deed that will make me look guilty in the eyes of the world.
Oh God, will you abandon such gentle lambs, and throw them to the wolf? How could you sleep when such a deed was done?
Bring Desdemona here.
Alas, at birth they were badly fated.
[To himself] Ill tell my master about this.
[To herself] It's better when you just keep silent.
What, is there more than one sun in the sky?
Then send to herfrom the man who killed her brothersa pair of bleeding hearts. Write "Edward" and "York" on them. Then she might weep. So to wipe up her tears, present her with a handkerchieflike the one Margaret gave to your father, steeped in his son Rutland's bloodand tell her that this handkerchief wiped up the blood that drained from her sweet brother's body. Tell her to wipe her weeping eyes with it. If all this doesn't convince her to love you, then send her a letter describing your other noble deeds. Tell her that you secretly killed her uncle Clarence, her uncle Rivers, yes, and speedily killed her good aunt Anne for her sake.
[As LUCENTIO] He is my father, sir, and to be honest, you look a little bit like him.
Has anyone seen Timon yet?
You, sun which comforts the world, burn them! Speak to me and then be hanged! Because each true word must to you be like a blister, and each lie burn you to the root of your tongue, eating it away with your own talk!
No, my good lord. He says what everyone says. They all agree.
Welcome, my gracious lord; welcome, mighty queen. Welcome, warrior Goths; welcome Lucius; welcome to everyone. Although the food is modest, it will fill your stomachs, so please eat it.
Why, what did I do? I didnt do anything. I need to move away from you.
Trumpets, play! Drums, a call to arms! Don't let the heavens hear these tattle-tale women abuse the Lord's anointed king. Play, I say!
We swear to all of this.
Since I am maybe wrong in my guessand I admit it's my nature to look into possible misdeeds and often I imagine wrongs that aren't really thereI beg you in your wisdom not to put too much stock in what I say, since I often wrongly imagine things. Don't make a big deal out of my smattering of uncertain observations. It would not be good for you, and it wouldn't be wise, honest, or manly of me to let you know my thoughts.
Who are you, hiding in the darkness and eavesdropping on my private thoughts?
I was writing the epitaph for my tombstone, which will be seen tomorrow. My blight of health and and living well is now being cured, and death will bring everything with it. Go and keep living. Let Alcibiades be your blight, and you his. Live that way as long as you can!
Timon is crazy.
What do you mean by this melodramatic scene?
What if I had told you that I saw him do you wrong? Or what if I heard him say sothere are some villains out there who, once they have seduced or satisfied some mistress with their flirting and doting, can't help but brag about it
Oh, you fellow, come sing the song we heard last night. Listen closely to it, Cesario, it's a simple old song. The wool spinners and knitters used to sing it while they sewed, and innocent maidens recited it over their weaving. It tells the simple truth about the innocence of love, as it was in the good old days.
All of you gentlemen, I suspect that this piece of trash has played a role in Cassio's injury. Hold on just a bit, good Cassio. Come on, give me some light. Do we know this face or not? Alas, it is my friend and my dear countryman Roderigo! No, it can't beyes, it is for sure! Yes, it's Roderigo.
Please do, good madam. The situation has my husband troubled as if the problem were his own.
Good Norfolk, hurry to your post. Make sure everyone is on constant alert. Choose trusty watchmen.
But I'm surprised that someone as rich and well-provided as you is awake at this hour. It's odd that you'd want to sacrifice sleep when you don't have to.
What, is my Richard transformed and weakened in shape and mind? Has Bolingbroke deposed your intellect? Has he been in your heart? The dying lion hits the ground with his paw in rage; will you accept these humiliations and take your punishment like this, when youre a lion and a king of beasts?
Yes, Richard, I'll inform you when I knowbut right now I have no idea. As far as I can tell, the king has been putting a lot of trust in prophecies and dreams lately. And he picked the letter "G" from the alphabet, and says that a wizard told him that "G" will steal the throne from his children. And my name, George, begins with "G," so he thinks that the prophecy refers to me. Because of this, along with other trivial reasons, his Highness feels compelled to arrest me.
Go to your nephew Lucius, gentle Marcus, and tell him to come to my house, bringing some of the Goth princes with him. Ask him to leave his army where they are; tell him the emperor and the empress are also coming for a banquet at my house, and hell feast with them. Do this out of love for me, and tell him to come out of love and respect for his old father.
So, if there were two men such as you, it wouldnt take long for there to be none, because each of you would kill the other. Why, you would fight with a man if he had one more or one less hair in his beard than you have in yours. Youll fight a man whos cracking nuts simply because your own eyes are the color of hazelnuts. Only someone like you would look for that kind of fight. Your head is as full of fights as an egg is full of food, but your head has gotten scrambled like an egg from all your fighting. You once fought with a man who coughed in the street because he woke up your dog that was sleeping in the sun. And can you deny that you had a falling out with a tailor because he was wearing a new jacket before Easter? And with another for tying his new shoes with old laces? And yet youre trying to tell me how to avoid fighting?
I am, my lord. But I won't stay there long. I'll return from there before your Lordship does.
I don't doubt that his friends will turn on him and join us.
The sea must have been drunk if it dropped you here.
Diana, bless your perfect plan! I will make a sacrifice to you tonight. Thaisa, this is Lysimachus, who's engaged to your daughter and is about to marry her in Pentapolis. And now, I'll shave off this long beard that I've grown for the last fourteen years. I'll look young again for your wedding day, Marina.
What, my gracious lord?
Hurry up, hurry up.
But in the meantime God grants that I need your help. My brother, the Duke of Clarence, is imprisoned because of your influence. I am disgraced, and the nobility are scorned, while great promotions are handed out daily to those who weren't worth a noble two days ago.
All hail, Lucius, Rome's gracious governor!
Goodbye, cousin: what you can't tell me now, write to me.
Get a urine sample from him and take it to the healing woman.
Well then, sir, we will stop.
Shame! You draw your sword against a woman?
No, it's because your legs are too thin.
If I just told you she was alive, you would write it off as an old fairytale. But even though she hasn't spoken, it certainly looks like she's living. Wait a minute. [To PERDITA] Speak to her, ma'am. Kneel and ask for your mother's blessing. [PERDITA kneels behind HERMIONE][To HERMIONE] Turn around, my lady. Our Perdita is found.
Forgive me, my lord, but the man who should sing it isn't here.
Come here, you rogue! What, have you forgotten me?
I've told you so many times that this would happen! I've been saying that I'd be ruined as soon as we were found out!
Go, Nurse. Go with her. Well go to the church and have the wedding tomorrow.
Heres Romeos servant. We found him in the churchyard.
[To herself] True. You've gone from a gentleman to a fool.
Hello! Who is it?
I pray to heaven that Othello is safe. For I have served under him, and he commands like a perfect soldier. Let's go to the shore, both to see the ship that's already arrived, and also to look out for brave Othello, even until it's so dark that we can't tell the blue sky from the sea.
But not a minute, king, that you can give: you can shorten my days with sorrow and keep me up at night, but you can't give me a morning: you can help time to age me, but you can't stop wrinkles in their tracks: your word can make me die more quickly; but once I'm dead, all your kingdom couldn't make me breathe again.
You heard her say herself that it wasn't me.
Tell the jailer to come in here. Tell him who I am. [The gentleman leaves][Muttering to herself] Oh, Hermione, you're good enough for any court in Europe. What are you doing in a prison? [The gentleman comes back in with the JAILER]Now, sir, you know who I am, right?
I'm off to do it, my lord.
To satisfy Dionyza.
Why, York, what will you do? Will you not hide the crime of your own child? Do we have any other sons? Are we likely to have any more? Arent I too old? And will you take my fair son away from me in my old age, robbing me of the name of a happy mother? Isnt he like you? Isnt he your own?
What a racket you're making out here! My lady Olivia called up her steward Malvolio and told him to kick you out of the houseit's true.
He's just a country gentleman. He's done no more than any other knight would do, he's broken a lance or two, so let it go.
This little song is in honor of my drowned father. This is not something done by mortals. Nor is it a sound that could come from the normal world. I hear it now coming from above me.
Go hang yourself, you rascal! Hang yourself, you loud, disrespectful bastard! Were less afraid of drowning than you are.
Yes, my lord, and she loves me back.
Good sir, be a man. Think about it: every married man has experienced what you're going through. There are millions of wives now living who sleep in disgraced beds which they swear belong only to their husbands. But you're better off. It's even worsea curse from hellto kiss your wife in bed thinking that she is chaste when she isn't. No, I'd rather know if my wife were cheating on me. Then I'd know exactly what sort of person I am and what sort of person my wife is.
Ive been so drunk since I last saw you that I fear Ill never get the alcohol out of my bones. But at least I won't have to fear rotting, since the alcohol will keep me so well-preserved.
Youre being called for, asked after, and looked for in the great chamber.
I can't be offended by the name of my business. Please say it.
I will leave this handkerchief in Cassio's room, and let him find it there. Unimportant, trifling matters count as strong evidence to the jealous. This may have significant consequences. The Moor is already being changed by my poisonous advice. Dangerous suspicion are like poisons that don't even taste very bad at first, but slowly act on the blood and burn the insides before long like unquenchable sulfur.
The wind's been blowing loudly on land, too. The strongest gust I've ever seen shook our walls. If the same kind of wind has been raging on the sea, what ships made of oak could hold together when waves as tall as mountains strike them? What do you think will happen?
If I weren't in love with Mopsa, I wouldn't spend any money, but since I am in love, I'll have to buy some ribbons and gloves.
Roderigo!
I have, and I know what I'm doingfollowing my heart. Call me crazy; if I'm crazy, I embrace it.
Come, go with me to my armory; Lucius, Ill fit you with armor, and youll go to the empresss sons dressed like that, carrying presents from me. Come, comeyoull take the message for me, wont you?
Youll cut off the heads of the maids?
By God, here he is!You broke my head for no reason. I didn't do anything, and whatever I did, Sir Toby made me do.
Come here, Sir Andrew. Come here, Fabian. We'll whisper together about some wise sayings.
I swear by the God who raised me up to this anxious height from the contented life I used to enjoyI never provoked the king's anger against the Duke of Clarence. I have only ever advocated for him and pled on his behalf. My lord, you do me wrong to implicate me in these wicked suspicions.
You slander her, and you are a devil.
Tell her to devise a way to come to confession this afternoon. And there, at Friar Lawrences cell, she can make confession and we will be married. [Holding out some money to the NURSE] Here is a reward for your efforts.
That was well done, my little friend. Remain invisible. Go get those cheap, showy clothes from my house. Bring them here for us to use as bait to catch these thieves.
Yes, I did.
The watchdogs bark.
Hastings loves the Prince because of his great love for his father, the late King Edward. We won't be able to convince him.
Let's hear it, then. Come on, sit down, come on. And do your best to scare me with your ghostsyou're very good at that.
It's just lust, and your will is letting it control you. Come on, be a man. Drown yourself? Drown cats and blind puppies instead! I have told you that I am your friend, and our bond is strong. I am being a good friend to you right now. Sell some things to put money in your wallet. Desdemona can't stay in love with the Moor for longget money in your walletand he can't stay in love with her. It was such a sudden union, and you'll see an equally quick separation. Put money in your wallet. He now finds her sweet, but before long he'll think she's bitter. She'll want to exchange him for a younger man. Once she's had her fill of his body, she'll realize the errors of her decision. So put money in your wallet. If you absolutely must kill yourself, do it a better way than drowning. Gather all the money you can. If a little marriage vow between a wandering barbarian and a gentle Venetian isn't too much for my clever wits, you'll have her soon. So sell your things for some money! To hell with drowning yourself! That's a ridiculous idea. It would be better to get hanged for committing a crime in an attempt to win her than to drown for being without her.
Then hurry up and go to Friar Lawrences cell. There waits a husband to make you his wife. Now the lustful blood is rushing up to your cheeks. You blush scarlet whenever you get excited at some news. Get to church. I must go elsewhere to get a rope ladder that your love will use to climb up to your window when its dark. I do the drudge work for your pleasure. But soon enough, youll be doing your wifely work tonight with Romeo. Go. Ill go to lunch. You go to Friar Lawrences cell.
Bury him up the chest in the ground, and starve him. Let him stand there, and scream, and cry for food; if anyone gives him anything or takes pity on him, they'll die for it. This is my judgment; someone make sure he's buried in the ground.
[To herself] And may God take revenge on him!
What supports did I have besides both of them? And they are dead.
She trembled and shook, because the bridegroom starting stamping and swearing, as if the priest was trying to cheat him out of his marriage. But then when the ceremony was finally done, he called for wine. "A toast!" he said, as if he were some drunken sailor partying with his mates after a storm. He chugged the wine and then threw the dregs in the sexton's face, just because the man's beard looked "thin and hungry" and seemed to be asking for it. After that he threw his arms around the bride's neck and kissed her with such a noisy smack that the whole church echoed when their lips parted. After seeing that, I immediately left the shameful scene. I'm sure the rest of the crowd is following me. There's never been a wedding as crazy as that!
So youre not in love?
Come on. Hes hidden within these trees to be alone with the night. His love is blind, so it's fitting he share it with the dark.
Whoever made the painter did a better job, and he himself is a terribly flawed piece of work.
No, I do not eat lords.
How did this happen?
If a fool like you could find it.
"Madam."
Sir, you're the nearest thing to a god that a man can be. Can you explain how my queen came back to life?
What? Explain this to me again, wife. She refuses? She doesnt just say thank you? Is she not proud of the match? Is she not counting her blessings that we have found for her, unworthy as she is, such a noble gentleman to be her bridegroom?
[To ANDREW] Please, sir, put away your sword, please.
[Shouting from inside] Servilius, help! Timon! Timon!
One of the most beautiful parts of it (it brought tears to my eyes) was when the king explained how the queen died, and the poor princess listened to the whole thing, crying, saying "Oh, no!" and practically bleeding tears. I think my heart wept blood. Even the most unemotional people there nearly fainted, and everyone cried. If the whole world had seen it, the sadness would have been universal.
How tall was she?
No, good lieutenant! Please, sir, stop hitting him! [He holds CASSIO back]
Please, let me look at that one again.
By God, anyone who says that about him is a villain and a naysayer. Who said that?
Ill tell you so that you dont have to ask. My master is the great, rich Capulet. And as long as you are not a Montague, I invite you to come and drink a cup of wine at our house. Have a nice day!
What a man, young lady! Hes a man as great as any other in the world. Hes so perfect its as if he were sculpted from wax.
Kings and princes could have watched a play like that, considering kings and princes were the actors.
Almost four o'clock.
Really, she talks too much. She even talks when I'm trying to sleep. I admit that maybe she talks less in front of you, and thinks before she speaks.
Don't look so amazed, gentlemen. It is really true.
Good grandmother, tell us, is our father dead?
Even or odd, of all the days in the year, shell be fourteen on the night of July 31st. She and my daughter SusanGod rest all Christian soulswere born that same day. Well, Susan died and is now with God. She was too good for me. But, as I said, on the night of July 31st, Juliet will be fourteen. Yes, she will indeed. I remember it well. Its been eleven years since the earthquake, and it was on that very day that she stopped nursing from my breast. Ill never forget it. I had put some bitter wormwood on my breast as I was sitting in the sun, under the wall of the dovehouse. Your husband and you were in Mantua. Oh my, what a great memory I have! As I said, when Juliet tasted the bitter wormwood on my nipple, the pretty little thing got angry with my breast. Thats when the earthquake hit and the dovehouse started to shake. You didnt have to tell me to get out of there. Its been eleven years since then. She could stand up by herself then. No, in fact, by then she could run and waddle all over the place. I remember because just the day before she had cut her forehead. My husbandGod rest his soul, he was a jolly manpicked Juliet up. Oh, he said, Did you fall on your face? Youll fall backward when you grow up, wont you, Jule? And, by God, the pretty little thing stopped crying and said, Yes. To watch a joke come true! Even if I live a thousand years Ill never forget it. Wont you, Jule, he said. And the pretty fool stopped crying and said, Yes.
What's the matter, lieutenant?
My king, I throw myself at your feet. You have power over my life, but not my honor: it's my duty to obey you, but my good name, even if you take my life, will not be dishonored by you in death. I am disgraced, insulted, and slandered here, my soul pierced with the venomous spear of lies, which no medicine can cure except the blood of the man who has poisoned me.
What's the matter with you, ma'am?
Then here it is: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay in Brittany, received news that Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham (that late ran away from the Duke of Exeter), his brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston, Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint have been given eight tall ships and three thousand men by the Duke of Bretagne, and will soon land on our northern shore. They would have come earlier, but are waiting for the king to leave for Ireland. If you would free us from slavery, mend our country's broken wing, save the crown from pawnbroking, wipe off the dust that hides our scepter's gold,  and make high majesty look like itself again, come away with me now to Ravenspurgh; but if you're afraid, stay and tell no one, and I'll go on my own.
Either you'll dieas God's just punishmentbefore you can return victorious from this war, or else I will die from grief and old age. At any rate, I'll never see your face again. So take with you my most terrible curse, and may it weigh you down in battle more than your suit of armor. My prayers will fight on your enemies' side. And the little souls of Edward's children will encourage your enemies, promising them success and victory. You have lived in violence, and now you will die with violence. Your life has been shameful, so let your death be as well.
Then be ready for troubled times, sirs.
By God, that's a lively girl! Now I like her ten times more than I did before. Oh, I can't wait to talk to her!
From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
Go, go, poor soul. I don't envy your new throne. But make me happy by not wishing harm on yourself.
Trust me, my love, in my eyes you look pale as well. Sadness drains the color out of our faces. Goodbye, goodbye!
Don't be afraid to speak, Northumberland: telling us would be like telling yourself; and, speaking so, your words are just like your own thoughts; come out with it, then.
It's hardly uncommon for someone who committed such heinous offenses to deny them later.
Nonetheless, I beg youif you think it's possible and a good ideato let me talk with Desdemona alone for a little bit.
Ill be brief, because the time I have left to live is not long enough to tell a long story. Romeo, who lies there dead, was Juliets husband. And she, who lies there dead, was Romeos faithful wife. I married them. Their secret wedding day was the same day Tybalt died. His untimely death led to the banishment of the bridegroom. Juliet was distraught not over Tybalts death, but rather over Romeos banishment. To end her grief, you arranged for her to marry Count Paris. At that point she came to me, and, looking wild, threatened to kill herself unless I came up with a plan to help her escape this second marriage. Then I gave her a special sleeping potion that, as I had planned, made it seem as if she had died. Meanwhile, I wrote to Romeo to tell him to come here tonight, this awful night, to help get her out of her temporary grave when the sleeping potion wore off. But the man who carried my letter, Friar John, was stopped by an accident, and returned my letter to me last night. So at the time when Juliet was scheduled to wake up, I came here alone to take her out of her familys tomb. My plan was to hide her in my cell until I could get word to Romeo. But when I arrived, just a few minutes before Juliet awoke, Paris and Romeo were already here, lying dead. She woke up, and I begged her to come out of the tomb with me and bear this work of God with patience. But then a noise frightened me, and I ran from the tomb. She was too desperate to leave with me, and, it seems, she killed herself. I know all of this. And her Nurse knows about the marriage. If any of this misfortune is my fault, let me be sacrificed and punished under the strictest law.
Pitch our tents right here, in Bosworth field.
I am thinking about what I will say I have brought him. It must be some kind of portrait of himself, maybe a satire about the flightiness of wealth, with an exposition about the many flatteries that youth and opulence brings with it.
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] If I should ever come to hate your Grace, and fail to love and cherish you and your relatives, may God punish me by making me find hatred where I expect love. When I most need a friend and am sure that my friends are trustworthy, may they turn false, treacherous, and full of deceit. I beg that God will do this if I ever lose my love for you and your allies.
Your Worship is deceived. The gown is made just as my master directed me to make it. Grumio gave the order for how it should be done.
[As LUCENTIO] Do you know one of those citizens called Vincentio?
Now that that's done, give these men what they are due right now. Don't say or even imagine that my friends will fail me.
[Reading]"By God, madam, you've wronged me, and the world will know about it. You've put me in a dark room and let your drunken uncle torment me, but I've still kept my sanity and am no more crazy than you are. I have your own letter, which encouraged me to act the way I did, and with this letter I will prove that I am innocent and you are guilty. Think of me however you want. I will leave my role as your steward and speak out about the injuries you've caused me. Signed, the madly-abused Malvolio."
No, good goose, dont bite me.
I'm a horrible man for accepting all those gifts from Timon, when I could have been better! I gave up the opportunity to be a good man for something that brings me no honor! Servilius, I swear to god that I cannot help. I was actually going to send someone to borrow from Timon, and these men here will back me up. I swear on all the wealth of Athens! Tell Timon what I've said. I hope he will think of me well, even if I cannot help him. Tell him that it pains me more than anything else that I cannot aid such a good man. Servilius, would you be a good friend to me and tell him this?
As I slept under this yew-tree, I dreamed that my master fought someone else, and that my master killed him.
I promise I will. Meet me later at the castle. I have to bring Othello's things in from the boat. Goodbye.
Go call him here.
[To STEPHANO] Ill kiss your feet. Ill take an oath that Im your loyal subject.
Hey, more wine![Singing]And let me clink, clink the little can,And let me clink the little can,A soldier's a man,With a short life span,So why don't we soldiers drink!Some more wine, boys!
No one can avoid the doom of destiny.
I wish they were, so I could die at once. For right now your eyes are killing me with a living death. Your eyes have drawn salty tears from my eyes, making me weep shamefully like a child. My eyes have never cried like this beforenot even when my father York and my brother Edward wept at the death of my brother Rutland, who was slaughtered by the gloomy Clifford. And when your warlike father told the sad story of my father's death, and had to pause twenty times to sob and weep like a child, so that all the bystanders' cheeks ended up as wet as trees in a rainstormeven in that sad time I didn't shed a single tear. All these sorrows couldn't produce tears in me, but your beauty has blinded me with weeping. I never begged a friend or enemy or learned the art of flattery, but if your beauty is the reward, then I'll flatter and beg as much as I have to.
That's true, good lieutenant.
Quiet, then, no more. Continue.
If you're refusing this out of love and family honor, because you're reluctant to depose the child, your brother's sonwe all know how tender your heart is. We know what gentle, kind, and tearful feelings you have for your relatives, and indeed for people of any rank and status. But know this: whether or not you accept our request, your brother's son will never be our king. We'll find someone else to take the throne, to the disgrace and downfall of your family. And with this we leave you.
If that's true, then we shouldn't have to do away with truth altogether. Right now it's like truth has disappeared from the face of the earth.
No, my dearest love, I would never do that, not for anything in the world.
[As LUCENTIO] I thank you, sir. Where is the best place to draw up the necessary papers and settle this matter?
Come here, and swear that what you just said was true by kissing the book. [STEPHANO gives the bottle to CALIBAN] Ill fill it back up again soon, I promise.
Come, Sir Andrew, there's nothing to be done. The gentleman insists on fighting one round with you for his honor's sake. The rules of dueling say he can't avoid it. But he has promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, that he won't hurt you. Come on, get to it.
[To himself]  Thank God I'm not an idiot! But, since there but for the grace of God go I, I won't look down on them.
[To FERDINAND] Be mindful that you stay true to your promise to remain chaste before marriage. Dont let your flirting push you over the edge. Even the strongest promises can get burned to a crisp by the fire of lust in your blood. Be more self-disciplined, or else say goodbye to your vow.
Men are not the same all the time. It was time and sadness that made him this way. Time presents to him the riches of his former days, the opportunity to become the man he was. Bring us to to him and we'll take our chances.
I've had one drink so far tonight, and it was a strong one. And see how much it's affected me? I unfortunately don't have a very good tolerance for alcohol, and I don't want to risk drinking any more.
What a witty mother! Too bad her son is witless.
I guarantee, my lord, that this person is more beautiful and charming than this person is a boy.
And I'll put on a happy face, like you told me.
Not nearly as old.
From what I see at this feast, I don't think so.
You wont, then?
Are you hiding that forehead with a golden crown, when, if the world was just, it would be branded with the mark of your crimesthe slaughter of the prince who rightfully possessed that crown, and the monstrous deaths of my poor sons and brothers? Tell me, you low-born criminal, where are my children?
It was very strange.
Romeo killed Tybalt. Tybalt killed Mercutio. Who should pay the price for Mercutios life?
Tranio, because I have always longed to see Padua and its famous university, I wanted to stop here on my way to fertile Lombardy, that pleasant garden of great Italy. And now, thanks to my father's love and approval, and your own good companyhere I am. So, my trusty, dependable servant, let's rest here a while and begin a course of intellectual studies. I was born in Pisa, famous for its serious citizens, along with my father before me: Vincentio of the Bentivoli family. He was a successful merchant and world traveler, and it now seems fitting that I, Vincentio's son, brought up in Florence, should fulfill all my father's hopes for me and increase his wealth with my own virtuous deeds. And therefore, Tranio, I will study virtue for now, and that area of philosophy that discusses how to achieve happiness through virtue. But tell me what you think of all this, for I have left Pisa and come to Padua, and now I feel like I've left a puddle behind and jumped into an ocean, hoping to quench my thirst.
Call every last one, I'll answer them all. I have my rights. I won't budge an inch. Let the constable comeI welcome him!
My servingman-monster is so drowned in the wine hes drunk that he cant even talk. For my part, not even the sea can drown me. Before I reached the shore from the shipwreck, I swam a hundred and five miles. Therefore, monster, youll be my lieutenant, or my flag-bearer.
Won't you be glad to see that pretentious, rascally dog get humiliated?
What's going on now?
If there were no other reason
"Don't be afraid of my greatness." It was well written.
If I can trust my eyes, this is a beautiful sight.
What, you mean my face?
Boy, lead these gentlemen to my daughters, and tell them that these are their tutors, so make sure to treat them well.
Please, read it like a sane person.
He is a knight. His sword has never been used in battle, and he was knighted through his court connections rather than his battle skill, but he's a devil when he's fighting a private duel. He's killed three people, and his anger is so great right now that the only thing he'll be satisfied with is seeing you dead and buried. "Kill or be killed, it doesn't matter" is his motto.
What? Youre feeling moody? What is it that you would demand from me?
Some dungeon.
I was trying to do what was right.
Sweet York, shut up. Listen to me, gentle liege.
Why have you killed your only daughter like this?
Well, Im basically finished. But still
And what's her story?
What if a man were to bring him a couple hundred pounds to have fun with?
I don't want any halves. I'll bear it all myself.
I admit to two sleeves.
Your request is perfectly reasonable. In Apollo's name, bring forth the oracle.
Did you call, sir?
What do you know?
Oh, my God!
Oh, my lord, banish me, but do not kill me.
With Rosaline, my holy father? No, I have forgotten her and the sadness she gave me.
Now my friend Petruchio will do me a favor, and present medisguised in somber robesto Baptista as a teacher, well-versed in music, to instruct Bianca. With this disguise, I'll at least have time and permission to be with Bianca alone, and then I can court her once more.
I'm not tall enough to look like a real priest, nor skinny enough to look like a good student, but if you're known as an honest man and a good neighbor, then that's just as good as being dutiful and intelligent. Now here come my associates.
I'm your friend Timon. I feel for you.
Don't come back, and instead tell all of Athens that Timon has built his house on the shore, and everyday will cover himself with the surging foam of the sea. Tell them to come here and let my grave-stone be their guide. Oh lips, let these harsh words fall from you and be your last, let everything wrong with the world be healed by ravaging diseases! Graves are just another of men's works, and death another of their benefits! Go away, sun! Timon has finished his time on earth.
"If?" You protector of that damned whore, are you talking to me about "ifs?" You are a traitor. Off with his head. By Saint Paul, I swear I won't eat until I see him dead.
She was as unfaithful as water is inconstant.
She will not.
Yes.
He does indeed seem like a natural-born fooland besides being a fool, he's argumentative. If he didn't have the coward's gift of stepping away from a fight, they say he would've been long dead by now.
Get her, widow!
That's very important. Since this is what you want, sir, and I am sworn to obey youfor that's what your father commanded me when we left, saying, "Serve my son," although I don't think he had this in mindI will pretend to be Lucentio, because I love the real Lucentio so much.
Ah, I was your noble husband's mother, so I have just as large a share in your grief. I've already wept over my own worthy husband's death and kept myself alive only by looking at his sons, his mirror images. But now two of those mirrors have been cracked into pieces by death, and the only one left to comfort me is Richardan untrustworthy mirror who only causes me shame and grief. You are a widow, but you're also a mother, and you still have the comfort of your children left. But death has snatched my husband from my arms and then plucked my two crutches, Clarence and Edward, from my feeble hands. Oh, I have every reason to surpass you in sorrow and drown out your weeping with my own, as your loss is only half of mine!
Youll find me happy to do that, sir, if you give me a reason.
All right.
If it's not enough, it's still worth more than all of you, because you serve bad men.
Hey, guys, I like you a lot. I'll give you some gold, and in return you may rid the world of some evil men. Hang them, stab them, drown them in a toilet, I don't care. Get rid of them some way, and then come to me and I'll give you even more gold.
[As LUCENTIO] You're a fine fellow. Here, have a drink on me.
Timon, I feel so bad that I had no money left to give you when you asked me.
Your bedroom.
Close to nine.
Useless! The man's heroism at the battles of Lacedaemon and Byzantium should be enough to win him his life.
Well, then my pump is covered in flowers.
Lucius, I will.
Oh, in the Duke of Gloucester's purse.
Come, come, Lavinia; see, your enemies are in chains. Men, stop them from talking, I dont want to hear it. But I want them to hear every word I say. Oh villains, Chiron and Demetrius! Here is the fountain youve stained with mud, the lovely summer youve mixed with your winter. You killed her husband, and for that vile crime two of her brothers were condemned to death, and my hand was cut off and made into a joke. You cut off her sweet hands and her tongue. And worse than that, inhuman traitors, you took something from her more precious than hands or tongueyou raped her. What would you say, if I let you speak? Villains, youd be ashamed to beg for mercy. Listen, miserable criminals! This is how I mean to kill you. I still have one hand left to cut your throats, while Lavinia holds between her stumps the basin that will receive your guilty blood. You know that your mother means to dine with me, and calls herself Revenge, and thinks that Im crazy. Listen, villains! Ill grind your bones to dust, and with your blood and that dust Ill make a paste, and of that paste Ill make two pies out of your shameful heads. And then Ill tell that whore, your unholy mother, to eat you and swallow her own children. This is the feast Ive prepared for her, and this is the food shell eat. For you treated my daughter worse than Philomel, and Ill be revenged worse than Progne. And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come,
The darkness of night masks my face, or else youd see me blushing about the things you heard me say tonight. I would gladly stick to the proper manners of courtship and deny everything I said. But, instead: I'll say goodbye to good manners! Do you love me? I know you will answer yes, and I will trust you. But your swears may turn out to be false. They say that Jove laughs when lovers lie. Oh, noble Romeo, if you really love me, say it in truth. Or if you think Im letting myself be won too easily, then Ill frown and act superior and unapproachable so that youll woo me. But if thats not necessary, then I would never act that way. In truth, beautiful Montague, I like you too much, which might make it seem as if I am overly silly and flirtatious. But trust me, gentleman, Ill prove to be more faithful than girls who act coy and standoffish. I probably should have acted more standoffish, I confess, but you overheard me talking about my passion for you before I knew you were there. So please forgive me, and dont condemn me for so quickly falling in love when it was only revealed to you because the dark night let you discover it.
And if I dont, may my hands rot off and never wield a sword again!
I was born to a higher rank than I have now, but I'm still well-off. I am a gentleman.
By the future.
Good, good.
And I agree.
From my heart and my soul too. If not, curse them both.
[Reading] "The sleeves elaborately cut."
As for me: rest assured I had no bad intentions. Actually, this whole place is disgusting. Goodbye. You are virtuous, and I have no doubt that you've had an aristocratic education. Here, here's more gold for you. Curse anyone who tries to force himself on you, may he die like a thief! If you ever hear from me again, it'll be for your benefit.
[Drawing his sword] Draw your sword, Benvolio, and help me beat down their weapons. Gentlemen, this is shameful. Tybalt! Mercutio! The Prince has explicitly forbidden fighting in the streets of Verona. Stop! Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
You, sir? Why, who are you?
This gentleman Lucilius has served me for a long time. I will make some efforts to build his fortune, such is the duty of friendship. If you give him your daughter I will match whatever you give and make him her equal.
The rest of you can leave too.
Then, what does she think when I speak about love and peace?
What is that music? My good friends, listen!
Bid me farewell.
No, never.
Kind uncle York, the latest news is that the rebels have set the town of Cicester in Gloucestershire on fire; but we don't know whether they've been captured or killed.
The commons won't be satisfied, then.
They will be satisfied: Ill read from the book where all my sins are writtenmyself.
But I will bury them in your daughter's womb, and in that nest of fragrant spices they will be reborn again, to grow and comfort you.
Grandfather, it's Ovid's Metamorphoses; my mother gave it to me.
For what?
What are you doing there? Speak up.
Listen closely and do exactly what I tell you. If you fail at any point, it means death for not only you, but for your horrible wife (who, at least for now, I forgive). I command you as my subject to carry this bastard to some deserted place far away from this country. Leave it there, to the mercy of the elements. It appeared in my life by a stroke of bad luck. Therefore, I command that you, on pain of damnation and death, leave it up to luck whether it lives or dies. Now pick it up.
Because I think that she loved you as well as you love your lady Silvia. She dreams of the man who has forgotten her love. You are obsessed with someone who doesn't care to have your love. It's a pity that love should be so contrary. And thinking of it makes me cry, "Ah!"
Do you hear, Biondello
What, a drum? So soon? [Talking to some of the gold] I'll bury you: you will walk about again when your keeper cannot stand because of his gout. Actually, no, stay out here for leverage.
What do you think of this change?
There is hope for the country under his rule, though. A young king who governs wisely under his advisors will govern wisely on his own when he reaches adulthood.
[To a SERVINGMAN] Who is that girl on the arm of that man over there?
By the Virgin Mary, Id swear thirty years.
[Disguising his voice] What's going on, I say! Quiet in this prison!
The only profit I seek is a quiet, peaceful match.
In that the king is condemned by everyone.
Antonio, I arrest you on the orders of Duke Orsino.
There is good hope, madam. The king seems cheerful.
No, my precious darling, Id rather tear my muscles and break my back than let you do such dishonorable work while I sit lazily nearby.
If you assumed this disposition to punish yourself for our pride, that was a good idea. But you are forcing it! If you weren't a beggar, you could be a courtier again. Willful poverty is safer than uncertain luxury, and achieves what it wants sooner. One is always seeking more and never fulfilled. The other will accept no better situation, but has a crazy and miserable existence and is happy with the worst of the worst. You should kill yourself, as miserable as you are.
My lord
I hope your business destroys youthat is, if the gods don't first!
Don't worry about it.
A sword is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
Here is the receipt for debts you owe me.
Gentlemen, go on to the bridal dinner. I see that a woman will be made into a fool if she doesn't stand up for herself.
Dear lady, why are you in mourning?
Oh Godof whose side I call myself captainplease look upon my forces with a gracious eye. Put the bruising swords of anger in their hands, so they can crush the helmets of our enemies! Make us agents of your divine punishment, so we can praise you when we're victorious! I entrust my soul to you now, before I close my eyes and fall asleep. Oh God, defend me always, whether sleeping or waking! [He falls asleep]
If you continue to complain, Ill split an oak tree and lock you inside its wooden trunk until youve howled for twelve years.
I can't say.
Calm down, no one here is going to steal from you. However, we would like to trade you for your poor man's clothes, so get undressed (it's necessary, you see) and change clothes with this gentleman. Though Florizel's getting the worst end of the deal already, we'll give you some money, too.
Call them in.
If only you were, sir.
Why have you not proclaimed Northumberland and all the rest of the rebels as traitors?
Could I speak with you a moment, your honor? It is urgent.
Oh, curse those evil people! It was a person like this who got inside your head and made you suspect that I cheated on you with the Moor.
Who could say that I'm a villain, when I give free and honest advice that is helpful for Cassio in winning back the Moor's favor? For it really is easy to persuade Desdemona to help you in anything. She gives rise to as many good things as nature itself. And Othello is such a slave to his love for her that he would renounce his baptism and reject all symbols of Christian redemption to win her over. She can do whatever she wants, and whatever she desires he will carry out. How then could I be a villain, when I am advising Cassio to do what is in his best interest? That's Satan's theology! When devils do the worst sins, they first put on the pretense of goodness and innocence, as I am doing now. For while this honest fool begs Desdemona to fix his misfortune and while she pleads on his behalf to the Moor, I'll poison Othello's thoughts by whispering into his ear. I'll say that Desdemona is standing up for Cassio because she is attracted to him. The more that she argues for Cassio, the guiltier she'll seem to the Moor. In this way I'll turn her own virtue into a sort of tar, to entrap herand everyone elsewith her own goodness.
Sir, I didn't do anything. These gentlemen are my friends and can vouch for me.
Anything.
Come on, buddy!
Norfolk, there's a worse sentence for you, which I say with some regret: the slow hours will not bring you any closer to ending your banishment, for I order you never to return, upon pain of death.
It looks like food for kings.
I swear by my own hand, I am. Good fool, bring me some ink, paper, and light, and then deliver the letter I'll write to my lady. You'll be better rewarded for delivering this letter than you've ever been rewarded before.
Well, I can cut a caper.
Groan?! Why, of course not. Just tell me who it is.
Oh my friends, I wanted to say one thing to you. You, my good lord, I must beg youpleaseto honor me by taking this jewel. Accept it and wear it kindly, my lord.
Now the winter of our troubles has been transformed into glorious summer by the ascension of my brother, King Edward IV, son of the house of York. All the clouds that had descended over our family have now been banished and returned to the sea. Now we wear wreaths of victory on our foreheads, and we've hung up our armor as decoration. We've exchanged the sound of our battle trumpets for the sound of joyful greetings, and our death marches have become stately dances. The grim, warlike expressions on our faces have smoothed. And instead of charging on armored horses to frighten our opponents, we now dance in ladies' chambers to seductive songs on the lute. But as for me, I am not made for such games of love, or to admire myself in a mirror. I was badly made, and I lack the good looks to strut in front of passing girls. Nature has cheated me out of handsome features and proper proportions. I was born deformed, unfinished, and born prematurely. I was barely half-created when I came into the world, and left so lame and misshapen that dogs bark at me as I limp past them. In such delicate times of peace, I have nothing to do. No joys help me pass the time, unless I want to see my own shadow in the sun and make speeches about my deformity. Therefore, since I cannot amuse myself by being a lover during these peaceful days, I am determined to become a villain. I have hatched plots and put dangerous plans into action, using prophecies made while drunk; slander; and stories about dreams in order to set my brother George, Duke of Clarence, against my other brother, the king, so that they hate each other. If King Edward is as true as I am clever, false, and treacherous, then this very day Clarence will be imprisoned because of a prophecy that "G" will murder Edward's children. But, you thoughts, hide yourselves deep down in my soul, for here comes Clarence.
Come, sir, you rudely threw it to her, and she wants it to be returned just as rudely. [he throws down the ring] If it's worth stooping to pick up, there it is where you can see it. If not, let whoever finds it first have it.
Let him know, son. There's no reason he would disapprove your choice.
He and I have triumphed in the great shower of your gifts and enjoyed it so much!
Now, by my Saint George, my garter, and my crown
She's a little purebred hunting hound, and she adores me. What of it?
Ive drawn my sword out of its sheath. Fight them! Ill back you up.
So it is. I wonder what it means.
Oh, my mistressa villain has played tricks with love. My husband said she was unfaithful!
Well, sir, my friends praise me and in so doing make a fool of me, while my enemies tell me plainly that I am a fool. Therefore my enemies help me gain knowledge of myself, while my friends deceive me. The same rule applies to both conclusions and kissessince four negatives make two affirmatives, I'm worse because of my friends and better because of my enemies.
He asked me forhere he is.
I don't think he'd have any choice, my lord, believe me.
What now?
The matter, sir! I think most people can understand the fact that Polixenes is staying here longer.
I mean, sir, that by delaying were wasting our torches, which is like wasting the sunshine during the day. Show your good judgment by taking what I say the way I mean it, which is five times more important than literally trusting your five senses.
What is it?
[As VINCENTIO] Help, son! Help, Sir Baptista!
Why only a "small group," my Lord of Buckingham?
Hes more than just the Prince of Cats. Oh, he does everything according to convention. He fights like you sing printed music, carefully keeping the correct time, distance, and rhythm. He rests when it is proper to rest: one, two, and the third in your heart. Hes a master duelist who can hit any of his opponents buttons that he chooses. Hes a gentleman who learned at the finest fencing school, and hes skilled at identifying insults and slights to his honor so that hes forced to fight. He knows the passadothe forward thrustthe punto reversothe backhand thrustand the haithe thrust for the heart.
Hurry as fast as you can, and don't go too far inlandthis storm looks bad. Besides, this place is famous for its man-eating animals.
Are you talking to yourself?
Who takes a friend into consideration when it comes to love?
All right, what's your one thing?
We are only toasting my niece when we drink. I'll drink to her as long as there's a hole in my throat and alcohol in Illyria. Only cowards and scum wouldn't drink to my niece until their brains spin round like a top. What do you have to say to that! But hush, we must be polite. Here comes Sir Andrew Agueface himself.
I won't need to talk to him through you; here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!
Oh, Helicanus, pinch me! Hit me, make me feel some pain, or this great sea of happiness will overwhelm me and kill me! [To MARINA] Oh come here; I gave birth to you, but finding you makes me feel like I'm reborn. You were born at sea, buried in Tarsus, and found at sea again! [To HELICANUS] Oh, Helicanus, kneel and thank the gods in a voice louder than the storm: this is Marina. [To MARINA] What was your mother's name? Tell me that. The truth can never be confirmed enough, even if I have no doubts.
And I will too, to see how deep this villainy goes.
It's full of your foul crimes.
He's someone you must get to know, Kate.Where are my slippers? Can I get some water please?
You'll change your ways?
Nothing special, sir.
Tonight, tonight. But, mistress, do you know the French guy who works as a butcher?
Here he is.
Why me too, Timon?
You told me to make it properly and well, according to the current fashions.
Was it someone on horseback, or walking?
Come on, I'll go inside with you.
Oh, grandfather, grandfather! I wish I were dead, so that you could live again! Oh, God, I can't talk through my tears; they'll choke me if I open my mouth.
I mean, if they make us angry, well draw our swords.
[To RICHARD] Remember Vaughan, and drop your lance with guilt and fear. Despair, and die!
I'm not sure. I'm afraid it's choleric too. What do you say to a piece of beef with mustard?
Hey, shepherd: who's the young guy dancing with your daughter?
Make sure you understand: I have the willand the powerto make you regret this.
Do you want to fight us, sir?
There's no foreign news as bad as the news at home: the king is sickly, weak, and depressed, and his physicians fear for his life.
The same man who makes her queen. Who else should it be?
Yeah, it was eleven, and we brought them down again! But should I search the market?
Quiet, you villain, no more of that. Here comes my lady. It would be best for you if you came up with a good excuse for being gone so long.
Oh, he's the very meaning of generosity.
Nurse, speak well of me to your mistress. I pledge to you
Come, gentlemen, let's go to my tent and discuss tomorrow's business. The night is too raw and cold to stay outside.
Alas, good Kate, I would never burden you, for I know you're young and light
That's one of the villains that did this to me.
What if it comes back to you?
Harry, when will you do what I command? If you were an obedient son, I wouldn't need to ask again.
The queen, huh? Whether or not she's "good" is up for debate. Did anyone else notice this besides you? I mean, you're pretty intelligent, but idiots wouldn't pick up on that, right? It would have escaped the average personthey'd be totally blind to the matter. What do you say to that?
I always thought you were smart, Flaminius. Take this.
In my commonwealth Id do everything in the opposite way from what's normal. I wouldnt allow any business. There would be no judges. There would be no school or learning. No riches, poverty, or servants. None of that. No contracts, inheritance, privately owned land, farming, or vineyards. None of that. Thered be no metal-work, no grinding of corn, no wine-making, or making of olive oil. There'd be no work. Men would do nothing at all. Women too, except those things that are innocent and pure. Thered be no kingship
Can you do it?
Then, tell me, who is now the heir to the throne of Naples?
Oh, this makes her even more of an angel, and you more of a devil!
Madam, with all my heart.
I didnt say you were a liar. Are you out of your mind, and deaf, too? A curse on your wine bottle! This is what drinking wine does to you. May your monster get the plague, and you can go to hell!
Remember what I have done.
Well, then, you're a terrible son for not inviting him to your wedding. If my son were choosing a wife, I'd have a say in it, considering the future of my family is at stake.
Crying over Tybalts corpse. Will you join them? Ill bring you there.
Thank you, brave Cassio. What news do you have of my husband?
Tell us, old man, what should we do?
I can't go with you very far, for I must wait here. But I will see you soon.
So she will purchase that peace with everlasting war.
Everyone stand aside.
Montague has sworn the same oath I have, and is bound by the same penalty. I dont think it should be hard for men as old as us to remain peaceful.
Stop, murderous villains! Will you kill your brother? Now, by the light of the stars that shone so brightly when this boy was conceived, I'll kill whoever touches this child, my first-born son and heir! I tell you, boys, Enceladus and all of Typhon's offspring, or Alcides, or the god of war couldn't take this prey from his father's hands. What, what, you stupid, shallow boys! You white-washed walls! You painted alehouse signs! Coal-black is better than any other color, because it will never bear another hue: all the water in the ocean can never turn the swan's black legs to white, even if she bathed them hourly in the flood. Tell the empress from me that I'm old enough to keep my own child, whatever excuse she must make for it.
Gentlemen, stop pestering me about this. You know that my mind is made up. I won't let my younger daughter marry until I've found a husband for the elder one. I know and like both of you, so if either of you loves Katherine, then you have my permission to court her as you please.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my handwriting. Though, I admit, the letters look very similar. But it's definitely Maria's handwriting. And now that I think about it, she was the one who first told me you were crazy, and then you came in smiling and acting in the way the letter instructed you to act. Please, don't be so upset. You've been fooled by a cruel practical joke, but when we find out who's responsible for this, you will be the judge and jury who sentences the culprits to a punishment for their crime.
Nothing else, except read these accusations and admit that you and your followers committed crimes against the state: by confessing them, everyone here will see that you have been rightfully deposed.
That's just what I do, when I see a crab apple.
No, noble lady. When youre nearby, Im as fresh and strong as I am in the morningeven at night. I beg youso that I can mention it in my prayerswhat is your name?
He ran this way and jumped over this orchard wall. Call him, Mercutio.
This is him, a very brave man.
[To himself] What will this come to? He commands us to provide for others, and give great gifts, and all out of an empty pocket. He won't even let us tell him how much is left in his wallet, or let me show him what a beggar he truly is, having no power to actually make give the things he promises. His promises exceed what he has by so much that what he offers is putting him even further in debt. He owes money for every word he gives. He is so kind that now he pays interest for it. His land has been incorporated into their accounts. Well, I wish I were relieved of this job before he is forced to fire me! The man is happier that has no friends to feed than the one who has friends that do him more harm than enemies. I hurt so much for my lord!
I must. Otherwise, she'll make a ruckus in the street.
"M.O.A.I. rules my life." No, but first, let me see, let me see, let me see.
How are you out of breath when you have the breath to tell me that youre out of breath? The excuse youre making while delaying telling me the news is taking longer than it would to tell me your tale. Is your news good or bad? Answer that. Tell me that, and Ill wait for the details. Tell me at least that. Is it good or bad?
Is that how it was? No, no, good friends, back then the country was rich with intelligent advisors, and the king had virtuous uncles to protect him.
Oh, killing that child, Rutland, was the foulest, most merciless deed that was ever heard of!
There, on the ground, drunk on his own tears.
You're a villain!
All right, set it aside, but let's look through more ballads first. We'll buy the other things later.
Please, play yourself out.
Whats the matter, Juliet?
Then I'm off to the west! I wish you the best of fortune. You don't have a message for the duke?
Who's the worst person you know?
Yes, that the king is dead.
Say that again? The shadow of my sorrow hmm, lets see: thats very true, since my grief is inward, and these outward signs of sadness are just shadows of the unseen grief that lies within. Thanks, king, for your great generosity, that not only makes me sad but teaches me how to lament the cause of my sadness. Ill ask one favor, and then leave and trouble you no more: shall I have it?
A thousand times good night.
Please tell me, sir, who was that foulmouthed fellow with all his dirty jokes?
"Now go. You are assured of becoming a gentleman, if you want to be"
Both of you are too trustful of scoundrels who wish to deceive you.
I swear.
No, he just misses the actual truth entirely.
Three words, dear Romeo, and then good night. If your love is honorable and you want to marry me, send me word tomorrow. Ill find a messenger who will come to you, and you can tell that messenger when and where we will be married. All my fortunes Ill lay at your feet and follow you, my lord, all over the world.
It's not just noise, sir, it's an important discussion about godparents for you.
Madam, I have some of your temperament, in that I can't tolerate the language of disapproval.
Madam, I have done you this service. But you don't value what Iyour servanthave done. I risked my life and rescued you from the outlaw that would have raped you. Give me just one beautiful look as my reward. I cannot ask for a smaller favor. And I am sure this is the least you can do for me.
Are you serious, sir?[To himself] This must be a trick.
What a fuss youre making. Come on, what did Romeo say?
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I order you.
Bring down the top sail! Quickly, lower, lower! Bring the ship in line with the wind using the main sail.
Then don't say anything against yourself, Helicanus: if the prince is alive, let us see him. Otherwise just tell us where he's buried. If he's alive somewhere in the world, we'll find him; if he's in his grave, we'll find him there. Give us the right to know if he's still our rightful ruler or, if he's dead, let us mourn him with a funeral and then have an open election.
That's certainly true. But what a pity this is, Iago! Oh, Iago, the pity!
I am a friend who knows you well.
Yes, sir, we are part of her entourage.
[To FERDINAND] If Ive been too strict in my punishment of you, your compensation will make it better. For I am giving you my daughter, who makes up a third of my entire life, and who is everything I live for. I put her into your hands. All of the trouble I gave you was just my way of testing your love for her, and you have endured those tests extraordinarily well. Here, before God, I promise you that I will give you this precious gift. Oh, Ferdinand, dont laugh at me for praising her so highly, because youll discover that she exceeds all the praise given to her.
Is it afternoon?
[To VIOLA] There's nothing to be done, sir; he still wants to fight you just because he swore that he would. But he's reconsidered his reasons for challenging you, and now realizes that they're so insignificant that they're not worth discussing. So draw your sword so that he can fulfill his promise. He promises he won't hurt you.
That makes sensesomeone rich enough to ride a horse wouldn't have been wearing rags like this. Give me your hand, I'll help you up. Give me your hand.  [He grasps AUTOLYCUS's hand and pulls]
A singing, drunken monster.
What do you remember? Some house or person? Tell me about anything you see in your memory.
How are you, General? Have you hurt your head?
Yes, or just try to hide and suppress the lie.
God have mercy, Grumio! Then he'll have no chance.
Youre wrong there. I would have made it short. I had come to the full depth of my tale, and intended to say nothing more about it.
Bless you, daughter!
It shall not live.
Fool, fool, fool, I say!
My holy lady, these are two flaws that some alcohol and good advice will fix. If you give the dry fool a drink, then the fool won't be dry anymore. And if you give the unreliable man some good advice, then he can mend his ways and won't be unreliable anymore. And if he can't mend his ways, then let the tailor mend him. Anything that's mended is only patched up. A virtuous man who does something wrong is only patched with sin, and a sinner who mends his ways is only patched with virtue. If this logical argument will convince you, then good. But if not, what can be done? The only truly betrayed husband is one deserted by luck, and beauty is a lucky flowerso you won't remain alone for long, my lady. But you gave orders to take away the fool. So I tell you all again, take the lady away.
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
Oh no, you scorn me! I've been tricked!
You speak the truth. Proud Bolingbroke, I come to fight with you for our day of doom. This fit of fear was overblown; winning will be an easy task, since we're winning what belongs to us. Tell us, Scroop, where is our uncle with his army? Speak sweetly, man, although your looks are sour.
And what should I do in Illyria? My brother is in Heaven. Or perhaps there's a chance he didn't drown. What do you think, sailors?
Men look at the sky and see what sort of a day it will be; so you can guess, by my sad and tearful eyes, that my tongue has another heavy tale to say. I'm like a torturer, telling you all the bad news in small parts. Your uncle York has allied with Bolingbroke, giving up all your northern castles and all your southern army to him.
Then Ill take my serving knife to smack you upside the head. I wont need to sing. Ill make you sing. Do you hear me?
You taught me language, and all I gained from it is that I now know how to curse. May you die of the plague for teaching me your language!
Search the market carefully. Mytilene is full of young men. We lost too much money this season because we didn't have enough girls.
[As LUCENTIO] Then let's go to my lodging, if you'd like. That's where my father is staying, and tonight we can complete our transactions privately there. Send your servant for Bianca. My boy will fetch the notary right away. The only bad thing is that with such short notice, we'll only be able to offer you a small meal.
Will I forget to be who I am?
[Handing OLIVIA a paper] Lady, you have. Please look at that letter. You can't deny that it's in your handwriting. Try to write differently if you can, or try to say that that isn't your seal, with your design on ityou can't deny any of this. Well, admit it then and tell me, with the sincerity of an honorable person, why you gave me such clear signs of affection, telling me to come to you smiling, with crossed laces, to wear yellow stockings, and to be rude to Sir Toby and the servants? And when I obeyed all your commands, why did you then let me be imprisoned in a dark house, be visited by a priestand make me into the biggest fool and sucker that ever had a joke played on him? Tell me why.
Good night, honest Iago.
Thank you. Sailor, where are we?
Where is noble Rivers, and Vaughan, and Grey?
Here in your city; I just came from him. And (it may seem crazy . . . I can hardly believe it myself) while Polixenes was on his way to your court, chasing this young couple, he ran into this girl's father and brother, who have also fled the country.
I couldn't agree with you more; I have high expectations for him. He's a great kidlike chicken soup for the soul, he keeps us old folks young. The Sicilians who were old and in wheelchairs before he was even born are hoping they live to see him grow up.
Please, speak. You can't tell a lie; you look like the embodiment of Justice, like the queen of Truth. I will believe you, even if you say things that seem impossible, because you look like someone I used to love. Who was your family? Didn't you say, when I pushed you back, when I first looked at you, that you came from a good family?
The king has the face of someone who's just lost a much-loved territory in wartime. Just now I saw him and greeted him as always. He looked down at the floor, muttered to himself, and ran away, leaving me wondering what's going on that would so totally change his behavior.
[To FERDINAND] Sweet lord, youre cheating.
Did you call, sir?
What a bloody conclusion!
Whichever way this goes, I live or die a loyal, just, and honest gentleman true to King Richard's throne. A captive never escaped slavery with more happiness than my dancing soul feels at the prospect of doing battle with my enemy.  Most mighty liege, and my fellow nobles, I wish you all many happy years: I go to fight as peacefully and happily as if I were just heading out to play a game, for honesty sets the heart at ease.
In God's name, who are you?
Well, but what time is it?
The wind is good to send messages to Ireland, but we've heard nothing back. We can't raise an army the size of Bolingbroke's.
Who shall stop me? I will despair, and be an enemy to false hope: he is a flatterer, a parasite, and a keeper back of deathdeath, which would let us end our lives gently, when hope makes up live on and suffer.
Im weary. Give me some time alone. Oh, my bones are aching! What a journey this has been today.
You speak too bitterly.
[To himself] And as his moneybags will prove.
Lean close and I'll tell you.
Don't be afraid, my lord; God, who made you king, has the power to keep you king in spite of everything. We should make use of what heaven gives us, not ignore it; otherwise, by refusing His help, we're disobeying God's will.
Madam, I'll leave now.
Then we'll do that. Now let's go and figure out which of us will ride off to Ludlow.
How is this possible?
[To herself] Hes far from a villain.
Thank you! You're so generous.
I'll swear to do this, though it would have been more merciful to just kill it. [To the baby] Come on, poor baby. May a guardian angel protect you from vicious animals. They say that wolves and bears sometimes take pity on human babies on nurse them, too.[To LEONTES] Sir, good luck to you. [To the baby] I hope you're protected from everything horrible, you poor thing, even though you're condemned to be lost.
Hello, Marina! Why are you alone? Why isn't my daughter with you? Don't make yourself sick with being so upset; I'll be your nurse now. Look how your situation has changed with this unfortunate loss! Come on, give me your flowers before the sea air wilts them. Walk with Leonine down by the shore. The air will do you some good; the wind is refreshing and makes your stomach strong. Come on, Leonine; take her by the arm, walk with her.
Anything, sir, that I'm capable of doing. I'll lay down my life to save the innocent. I'll do anything that's possible.
Tell him I said thanks.
Yes, Desdemona.
[To DORSET] Quiet, Master Marquess, you're being impudent. Your noble title is so newly-minted that its not even legal yet. Oh, that your recent nobility could understand what it means to be lost and miserable! Those who are very high up must be shaken by many blasts of wind. And when they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
Ha, ha! What are these things here that we're seeing, my lord Antonio? Can you buy them with money?
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak words can persuade his mother to give up the Duke of York, then you can expect him here soon. But if she resists my mild requests, then God forbid that we should break the holy laws of sanctuary! I would not commit such a terrible sin even in exchange for a kingdom.
No, sir, I'm worse.
May God protect his Majesty!
Well, I'll have to rape her, or she'll ruin all our customers, converting the evil-doers to good.
You've faced many things, haven't you?
Asses are meant for bearing, and so are you.
Im just trying to keep the peace. Put away your sword, or else use it to help me stop this fighting.
No, boy, not that; Ill teach you another way. Lavinia, come. Marcus, take care of my house while Im gone; Lucius and I will go make a spectacle of ourselves at court. Yes, indeed we will, sir; and theyll pay attention.
Madam, Im here. What do you want?
[Picking up the letter] By God, this is my lady's handwritingthese are her C's, her U's, and her T's, and this is how she makes her big P's. It's her handwriting, without question.
Let's go meet and welcome him.
[To herself] But love won't be inspired by something it hates.
I beg you, dont scold me. The one I love now returns my love. The other did not.
What must be will be.
Not to his fathers house. I asked Romeos servant.
Be quiet, monster. Madame clothesline, isn't this my jacket? Thank you kindly. Now the jacket is under the line. Now, jacket, you'll probably lose your fur trim and become a bald jacket.
Then I do not lie.
Oh, no! You're dying, although I'm the sicker one.
I won't.
Monster, use your fingers. Help to carry these clothes to where my barrel of wine is, or Ill throw you out of my kingdom. Get going, carry this.
The feud is between our masters and us, their servants.
And you're not a loyal man, as we are.
Do something for me before I come to you. I see that Rape and Murder stand by your side; to prove that you really are Revenge, stab them or crush them under the wheels of your chariot. Then Ill come and be your charioteer, and travel with you around the globe. Ill give you two black horses to pull your wagon of revenge as you find the murderers in their guilty caves; and when the cart is loaded with their heads, Ill dismount and trot alongside your wheel like a slavish footman all day long, from when the sun rises in the east until it falls into the sea. And Ill do this hard task every day, if you destroy Rape and Murder there.
Fair cousin? I must be greater than a kingfor when I was a king, my flatterers were only subjects, but now as a subject, I have a king to flatter me. Since Im so great, I suppose theres no need to beg.
You are as impetuous as fire to say that she was unfaithful. She was heavenly faithful and honest!
But villain, aren't you the messenger?
I am your wife, my lord. Your true and loyal wife.
Why, what do you mean by "moveable?"
[Singing] Alas, why is she like this?
We want the money Timon owes.
Not since the time of the widow Dido.
[Whispering] Oh, if only I had a slingshot, to shoot him in the eye!
You've spoken your piece, now.
I did not kill your husband.
Well, what are you?
[To soldiers] Give me a goblet of wine. Give me a personal guard. Saddle my white horse Surrey for the battle tomorrow. Make sure that my lances are strong, but not too heavy.
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.
How many women saw his child?
Richmond? The last time I was in Exeter, the mayor politely showed me a castle and called it "Rougemont." The name startled me, for an Irish poet once told me that I wouldn't live long after seeing Richmond.
Time to be honest.
I believe you; the look on his face said it all. Give me your hand: if you lead me out of here, you can continue to work for me as my servant. My ships are ready and my people are, too, because they had expected to leave two days ago. Leontes is jealous of a very special woman and, because she's so special, his jealousy is intense; because he's a powerful king, his jealousy will be violent, too, and because he thinks he's been betrayed by his best friend, his revenge will be horrific. I'm paralyzed with fear. Let's hope we have a safe journey out and that the queen doesn't become a victim, too, of his delusions. Come on, Camillo. I'll love you as much as I love my own father if you can get me out of here alive. Let's go.
I figured. It never rains but it pours; one struggle gives way to another. It's that way with us. Some nearby country is going to take advantage of our weakness. They've sent all these ships to kick us while we're down, and conquer us in our misery, though it'll hardly be difficult for them to overcome us.
Not if you get out of here without saying another word.
It's like this: Baptista is safely taken care of. He's talking with the pretend father of the pretend son.
That light isnt daylight, I know it. Its some meteor sent from the sun to be a torchbearer, in order to light your way to Mantua. So stay for a bit longer. You dont have to leave.
Her eyes almost look like they're moving; this art is too realistic.
No, listen to me.
Quiet, please. Let someone who knows what he's talking about speak up. These men are just flattering you, sir, and flattery only fans the fire of sin. When a king's fault is just a spark, flattery is the blast that gives it heat and makes it glow stronger. On the other hand, wise advice is the best tool a king can make use of, since even kings make mistakes sometimes. When Mr. Yes-man over here wishes you good luck, he's flattering you and, really, threatening your life.[He kneels] Forgive me, sir. Hit me if you want. I can't get much lower than here, on my knees.
These events are not natural. They keep getting stranger and stranger.[To BOATSWAIN] Tell me, how did you get here?
The Duke sends his greetings, General. And he orders you to come appear before him immediately, right this very instant.
I'm such a fool to cry at the thing that makes me happy.
Are you a courtier or not, sir?
What?
Thanks for that joke. Here's some clothes in return. Jokes won't go unrewarded when I'm king of this country. Stealing with a plumb-line and carpenter's level is an excellent little joke. Heres some more clothes as a reward.
Have you spread the word about her all over the market?
And please, tell me: how do people seem to be reacting, especially the younger ones?
I thank you for that, master.
Tunis used to be Carthage, sir.
Is anyone listening to me?
Is the worst well? Very well taken, in truth, very wise.
Please, sir. Now is not the time to talk about this. Keep your questions until after dinner, then I will tell you why you have not repaid these debts.
Good madam, don't be angry with the child.
Honest, yes, honest.
If you want your eyes scratched out, then come at me. I'll leave on my own, but first I have to do what I came for. The good queen (because she is good) has given birth to your daughter. Here she is, now give her your blessing.
[Taking the money] This afternoon, sir? She will be there.
I've described her down to every last hair. I've drawn a picture of her with my voice.
God bless you, and fill you with humility, love, charity, obedience, and true duty.
What is she looking for? Lavinia, do you want me to read? This is the tragic story of Philomel, who was raped by Tereusand rape, I fear, was what happened to you.
Because I would have lost the angry wit I now have if I were a lord. Aren't you a merchant?
That's how you've interpreted it: it's your fault then.
Are my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
[To CASSIO] Who are you that's crying out in such pain?
Oh, sir!
Yes, it's monstrous, monstrous! That's how it is for Rivers, Vaughan, and Grey. And that's how it will be soon for some other men who think they're as safe as you and I arewe who are dear to princely Richard and Buckingham.
Oh, happy outcome from my kneeling! But I am still afraid; say it again. Two pardons is better than one.
Guys, what do you want me to say? The gods hear me when I say that I am as broke as you are.
No, but I am resolved on two points.
The gods, through you, amaze us. You've secured your fame forever.
I swear I'll hit you if you strike me again.
[Speaking to the door of the tomb] You hateful mouth, you womb of death. Youve feasted on the most precious girl on earth. So now Im going to force open your rotten jaws and cram more food into you. [ROMEO begins to open the tomb with his tools]
Sweet saint, for goodness's sake, don't be so harsh.
How are things going, Roderigo?
I'm afraid to know, sir.
Most radiant, exquisite, and unmatchable beautybut please, tell me if you're really the lady of the house, for I've never actually seen her. I would hate to throw away my speech on the wrong person, for it is excellently written and was very hard for me to memorize. Good beauties, please don't scorn me. I'm very sensitive, even to the slightest bit of rudeness.
Oh villains, vipers, damn them to hell! Dogs, easily won to slobber over any man! Snakes, nurtured in my own blood, that now sting my heart! Three Judases, each one three times worse than Judas! They want peace? Let hell make war on their souls for this!
Gentlemen, will you go raise men for battle? I don't  know how or which way to order the disorderly affairs that have been thrust into my hands, believe me. Both are of my family: the one is my sovereign, whom both my oath and duty bids me to defend; the other is also my kinsman, who the king has wronged, and conscience and my family bids me to fight for his rights. Well, we have to do something.
Why should you be afraid? Doesn't the city have strong defenses?
I cannot believe that those outraged at wicked men should still ask for money!
Yes, and it's a good marriage. He's married to a woman that surpasses description and exceeds her reputation. Words can't express how great she is, and no artist could capture her natural beauty.
Sir, I told her not to come near you, and explained that you (and I) would both be angry with her if she did.
Shes the fairies midwife, and is no bigger than the stone on the ring of a city councilman. She rides her carriage, which is pulled by tiny little creatures, over mens noses as they lie sleeping. The wheel spokes of her carriage are made of spiders legs; its cover is made of grasshopper wings; and its harnesses are made of the smallest spiderwebs. The horse collars are made from moonbeams, while her whip is a single cobweb attached to a cricket bone. Her wagon driver is a tiny gnat wearing a gray coat that is not even half as large as a little round worm that comes from the finger of a lazy young girl. Her carriage is an empty hazelnut, made by a squirrel and an old worm, which have been the fairies carriage-builders for countless years.  With this magnificent carriage she rides each night through the brains of lovers, who then dream about love. She rides across courtiers knees, who then dream about bowing and curtsying. She rides over lawyers fingers, who then dream about their fees. She rides over ladies lips, and they immediately dream of kisses. But Queen Mab often puts blisters on their lips because their breath smells of candy, which angers her. Sometimes she rides over a courtiers nose, and he dreams of sniffing out a way to make some money. Sometimes she tickles a priests nose with the tail of pig given as a tithe to the church, and he dreams of getting a high-paid church position. Sometimes she drives over a soldiers neck, and he dreams of cutting the throats of foreigners, of breaking through fortifications, of ambushes, of the finest-quality Spanish swords, and of huge mugs of alcohol before suddenly waking, frightened, by the sound of drums in his ears. Then he says a prayer or two and goes back to sleep. Mab is the one who tangles the hair of horses manes at night and then hardens the tangles in the foul, dirty hairs; tangles which, if you undo them, bring bad luck. Mab is the hag who gives dreams of sex to virgins and teaches them how to bear the weight of a lover and to bear a child. Shes the one
[To RICHARD] May I weigh down your soul tomorrow! Remember how you stabbed me at Tewkesbury in the prime of my life. So despair, and die!
You have a strange way of snoring. It sounds like you're speaking actual words.
And he also wants to know where you came from, what your name is, and who your parents are.
All three of them are desperate. Their guiltlike a poison given time to work in their bodiesnow begins to bite at their consciences. Those who are lively and energetic, I beg you, quickly follow them and stop them from doing whatever this fit of insanity is pushing them to do.
So, will that be tonight at dinner?
[Reading] "With a flared half-circle cape"
Catesby, hurry to the Duke of Buckingham.
Your mother.
Because you're like the peasant who strikes the bell, interrupting my thoughts with your begging. I'm not in the giving mood today.
Great Ventidius! Well, I am not the type of man to neglect a friend in need. I know that he is a gentleman that deserves assistance, which he will get. I'll pay the debt for his freedom.
Damn it, if I'd known that he was so brave and skilled at fighting, I wouldn't have challenged him in a million years. If he'll forget the whole matter, I'll give him my gray horse Capilet.
Come, bring her here.
Iago knows what he is supposed to do. But nonetheless, I will personally look after things.
[To ALONSO] I swear on the Virgin Mary, I cant go any further, sir. My old bones are aching. It's like we're walking in a maze, with some paths straight and some crooked. If it's all right with you, I need to rest.
They've fired a shot as a greeting. This ship is also friendly.
But the worst is yet to comechildren who arent even born yet will remember this day as sharp as a thorn to them.
Let's hear it, good Grumio.
Oh, wait a minute![To himself] This is the strangest dream that a poor idiot ever had. This can't be true; my daughter is dead. [To MARINA] Well, where were you born? I'll listen to you again, to the whole story, and won't interrupt you anymore.
It is my poverty, not my morals, that forces me to agree.
Sir, is she a princess?
Why are you crying, pretty girl?
Sir, sir, sir
You're an idiot. Go away.
Cassio isn't killed? Then the murder was botched, and sweet revenge hasn't gone as planned.
And tell us what was so important that it made you late for your wedding, and sent you here dressed so unlike yourself.
If you really love my brother Richard, then don't hate me. I am his brother, and I love him very much. If you're hired to do this for money, then go back again and talk to my brother the Duke of Gloucester. He will reward you better for sparing my life than King Edward will for news of my death.
Youre still affected by the magic and illusions of this island, which make it hard for you to believe that anything is real. Welcome to all of you, my friends.[To SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO so that only they can hear] But if I wanted to, I could prove that the two of you were traitors. And then you'd face the King's anger. But at the moment I wont say anything.
Unless I've mistaken his bannerswhich I'm sure I haven'this regiment lies at least half a mile south of the King's mighty army.
Wait! Ill come with you. If you leave me behind, youll be insulting me.
Confine myself? I'll only confine myself to these clothes I'm wearing. They're good enough to drink in, and these boots are too. And if they aren't, then let them hang themselves by their own straps.
Oh, how many cursed and violent days of unrest have my old eyes seen? My husband lost his life to get the crown. And my sons' lives have been tossed up and down for me to rejoice over their gains and weep over their losses. And when one of them gained the throne and got rid of the domestic quarrels, now the conquerors turn on each other, making war among themselvesbrother against brother, blood against blood, self against self. Oh, it's a perversion of the natural order, a frenzied outrage! Let it endor let me dieso I won't have to see any more death.
As you wish.
Give me your hand. And, Perdita, give me yours.
No, by the Holy Cross, and you know it well. You came to earth to make the earth my hell. Your birth was a painful burden to me. You were fussy and willful as a baby. Your school days were frightening, wild, and angry. As a young man, you were daring, bold, and adventurous. And in your maturity you've grown proud, cunning, sly, and bloodyless wild but more dangerous, flattering in your hatred. Can you name a comfortable hour I've ever had in your company?
How are you, my headstrong daughter? Where have you been?
Not really.
Now Iago is asking Cassio to tell the story again. Go on, well said, well said.
See, here she comes, bringing your willful wives with her as prisoners of her womanly duty. Katherine, that cap of yours doesn't look good. Take off the silly thing and stomp on it.
If we exchanged vows of love.
And good luck on your journey!
Now God in heaven forbid!
By heaven, they have already given me a drink.
How is my noble lord doing?
The ground is actually brown.
I wish my tongue could rot them off!
Ive been too strongly pierced by his arrow to soar. My wounded heart wont let me escape my dull sadness. I am sinking under loves heavy burden.
Come here, poor baby. I've heard (but haven't believed) stories about spirits of the dead walking the earth. If these things do happen, then your mother appeared to me last night in a dream that was so real, it felt like I was awake. Something walked toward me, moving its head from side to side. I've never seen anything so sad and so completely beautiful. In pure white robes, like a goddess, she walked toward the place where I was sleeping. She bowed three times, gasping as she tried to speak. Crying with rage, she finally burst out, "Antigonus, you have the bad luck to be disposing of my baby far away in Bohemia. Shed a tear as you leave her there. Since she's lost forever, you should call her 'Perdita.' And for what my husband has made you do, you'll never see your wife, Paulina, again." Then, shrieking, she disappeared into thin air. Terrified, it took me a while to collect myself, and I wasn't sure if it was a dream or not. Usually I don't put much stock in dreams, but this one I'd swear by superstitiously. I believe that Hermione died, and that Apollo wants this baby (who must be King Polixenes's daughter) to be laid here on its father's land, to either live or die. [He places the baby on the ground in a basket with a letter and some jewels]  Good luck! There you are, and there's the story of your identity. If you make it, these things might help you. The storm is beginning! Poor brat, you're out in the elements thanks to your mother's mistake, and who knows what will happen! I can't cry, but my heart is bleeding and I'm damned for getting tangled up in this. Goodbye! It's getting darker and darker. I'm afraid the lullaby you're about to get will be a little on the rough side; I've never seen the sky so black in the daytime. The thunder, the lightning! I need to get aboard the ship! [Walking away, he sees a bear running toward him] Well, this is it: I'm gone forever.
[Singing] Where is the life I used to lead? Where are thoseSit down, Kate, and make yourself welcome.Food, food, food, food!
I will do so. Sir Fabian, stay with this gentleman until I return.
That may be will be, on Thursday, my love.
All right, men, take a good look at her. I know what you're thinking: "She's an attractive woman, but it's too bad that she's a liar and a cheater." You can compliment her outer beauty, sureI mean, she deserves that! But then you have to admit that liars use their good looks to manipulate others into thinking they're good people! Your shrugs and your "hmms" show you're hesitant to say "she's honest," right? Everybody believe me; I'm the the real victim. She's having an affair.
What a monstrous act!
You didn't mourn with us when we were left fatherless. Your sadness as a widow will likewise go unmourned by us!
Yes, but you must at least confine yourself within the limits of order and decency.
The weather's fantastic, the air is fresh, the island is lush, and the temple is even more beautiful than everyone says it is.
Yesthere are a dozen, and in fact as many as would populate the whole world that they wagered for. But I think that if wives are unfaithful, it is their husbands' fault. Let's say they stop sleeping with us and give themselves to other women instead, or break out in fits of jealousy and impose restraints on us. Or let's say they hit us, or spitefully cut back on our allowance. Why, we feel resentment, and although we have some grace, we can still have some revenge, too. Let husbands know that their wives have good sense just like them. They see and smell and can taste both sweet and sour, just like their husbands can. What are they doing when they switch us out for other women? Is it for fun? I think so. And does physical attraction lead to it? I think so. Is it a weakness to do this wrong? I think so, too. And don't we have physical attractions, desire for fun, and weakness, just like men? They should treat us well, or else they should know that whatever bad things we do, we are only following their example.
You make gold from metal. Here, make gold from this! Get out of here you dogs!
That sounds good to me.Cambio, hurry home and tell Bianca to get ready right away. And, if you want to, tell her what has happened: Lucentio's father has come to Padua, and now she's likely to be Lucentio's wife.
Well, may peace be with you. Here comes the man Im after.
Sir, after having received so many of your gifts, and then hearing you were retired, abandoned by friends so ungrateful that all the whips of heaven are not large enough to punish them. Incredible! To you, whose stellar generosity gave life to them! It drives me mad, and I cannot conceive of any way to describe this level of ingratitude.
Because my name is George.
Go ahead and speak, Othello.
Perdita, come here.  [PERDITA and FLORIZEL move away to talk privately][To CAMILLO] I'll listen to you in a minute.
I will, holy lady, but even if I read this letter sanely, I'll still sound crazy. So pay attention, my princess, and listen.
I now have this high seat as King Richard because of your advice and assistance. But will I have these glories for a day only, or will they last long enough for me to enjoy them?
[To himself] Its that arrogant Montague who was banished. Hes the one who murdered my loves cousin Tybalt, which caused Juliet the grief that they think killed her. And here hes come to do something terrible and shameful to the dead bodies. Ill arrest him.
He's breathing, my lord. But he couldn't be sleeping so deeply in such a cold place if beer wasn't keeping him warm.
Lord Timon, would you hear me speak?
I hope he is, but mothers can have their doubts.
As in the pink flower.
These are my agents, and come with me wherever I go.
It's natural, sir. Wind and rain won't wash it off.
Definitely. Alcibiades says so, and Phrynia and Timandra got gold from him. He also gave the poor soldiers a ton. I also heard he gave his assistant a lot too.
Tybalt, old Capulets kinsman, has sent a letter to Romeos fathers house.
Hes been seen at that spot on many mornings, his tears adding to the morning dew and his deep sighs thickening the clouds in the sky. Then, as soon as the happy sun begins to dawn, my unhappy son comes home in order to hide from the light. He keeps to himself in his bedroom, shutting his windows to keep out the daylight so that he can sit in an artificial night. His bad mood is likely to have a bad result, unless someone can give him good advice and remove the cause of his sadness.
Ah, witty Romeo, now youve taken this joke so far that its worn out your pump. With the sole of your pump now worn away, the joke is all that remains.
Ok, and make sure to take care of them.
Here, my lord, all ready.
You're joking, Tranio! But have you both really given me up?
No, no, living men flatter those that die.
Heaven, be my witness. I will keep my wish forever.
I'd like to play the pimp, sir, and bring these two lovers together.
To be motivated is to act, while to be valiant is to face a fight. When youre motivated, you just run away.
You idiot, why would you ask if I can "undo it?"
Uninhabited, and almost inaccessible
I won't, believe me. I'll visit her like this.
[To KATHERINE] Say what he wants you to say, or we'll never go.
Banish me! Banish your old ways! Banish your money-lending! Banish everything that has ruined the senate!
I mean they should give her credit.
Youve argued well, sirand in return, we arrest you here for capital treason. My Lord of Westminster, keep him under guard until his trial. My lords, may it please you to grant the request from the House of Commons.
I'll do it, sir.
Oh, come on. I mean where does he sleep?
Do whatever pleases you, within reason.
Thanks, Antiochus, for reminding me of my own mortality. Those frightening things are preparing my body, like theirs, for the worst that could happen: death. When we remember death, it should act like a mirror, reflecting back to us the truth that life is short, and that it's a mistake to put our faith in it. I'll make my will, then, like sick men do when they've experienced the world and, near death, are both sad and resigned to give up the joys experienced on earth. I wish the best to you and to all good men (as every prince should do), and give away all my belongings.
[To ANTONIO] The clock strikes one. Count it.
Oh, my dear lady, the sun will set before I've finished the work I've been told to do.
We'll walk you up to the shore, then we'll give you up to Neptune and pray for the gentlest winds from the skies.
No, if our witticisms go on a wild-goose chase, Im done for. You have more wild goose in one of your jokes than I have in five of mine. Was I  even close to you in our goose chase?
I dont know how to tell you who I am by using a name. I hate my name, dear saint, because it is your enemy. If I had it written down, I would tear up the word.
You worked hard to make him stay. As hard as you tried, he insisted he had to get home.
Your suffering will make them sharp, so they can pierce like mine.
Well follow you. Juliet, Paris is waiting for you.
How are you feeling now?
Goodbye, then. I have to go buy spices for our sheep-shearing.
She really is perfect.
Good gentlemen, give me permission to speak. It is proper for me to obey my husband, but not in this case. Maybe I will never go home, Iago.
What does your Highness say to my just request?
Go hang yourselves, all of you! You are lazy, shallow creatures. I'm made of better stuff than you. You'll learn more about that, later.
[To JULIET] I take you at your word. If you call me your love, Ill take a new name. From now on Ill never again be Romeo.
Oh, why won't you respond to your friends?
Some games are difficult, but the effort they require contributes to the pleasure they give. Some kinds of dishonorable manual labor are undertaken for noble reasons. And many things that bring no money can lead to great wealth in the end. This hard and undignified work would be dull and disgusting to me, but the woman for whom I am doing this makes what is awful seem wonderful. She makes my hard work seem like a pleasure. Oh, shes ten times more kind than her father is nasty, and hes completely nasty. Hes issued a severe command that I have to move thousands of these logs and put them in a stack. My sweet lady cries when she sees me work, and tells me that such lowly work has never been done by such a noble person. These sweet thoughts refresh me and make me forget that I am working, especially when I am working the hardest.
I don't think so, my lord.
Yes, so what?
Have you heard anything about the old man having a son, sir? If it please you, sir?
Oh, good sir. My master instructed me to deliver a ring to Madam Silvia, which I forgot to do.
Alas, he is fainting! Oh, Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Lead on, monster. Well follow. I wish I could see this drummer. He's very good.
What's your news then?
Certainly, for you can see that it won't curl naturally.
You sound like a doctor, Helicanus, but what you're prescribing me is something you'd hardly do yourself. You see, I went to Antioch where, as you know, I faced death for the chance to win a famously beautiful woman. I had hoped we would get married and have children together, heirs for my throne that would strengthen my rule in this country and delight my subjects. I thought she was beautiful in person, but listen: they were committing incest. Once I figured it out, her sinful father didn't lash out; he suddenly became very smooth. As you well know, it's time to be afraid when tyrants kiss you. I ran away in the dark of night and, once I got here, thought I was safe. I know Antiochus is a tyrant, and that he's probably getting increasingly paranoid about what I know. And if he suspects that I've told the world how he killed all of those princes, and slept with his own daughter, then there's no doubt that he'll invade our country on the pretense of me having offended him. Then the country will be plunged into war for my socalled offense, and many innocent people will die, and everyone I love, yourself included, will blame me for it
Good Lord, they look a lot like the empresss sons! And you look like the empress! But we mortal men have miserable, mad eyes that are easy to deceive. Oh, sweet Revenge, now Ill come to you; and, if you can be happy with a one-armed embrace, Ill embrace you soon.
I'll try to live up to that, sir, to the best of my ability.
But, my lord, believe this: one of his men went to the Lord Lucullus to ask for that much. Really, he begged desperately for it, showing just how much he really needed it, and still he was rejected.
Oh, oh, Petruchio! Now Tranio hits you with a good one.
These challenges will stand until Norfolk comes back: although hes my enemy, Ill repeal his banishment and restore his lands and dukedom to him again. When hes returned, hell fight with Aumerle.
And the news you spread led to the murder.
What, my respectable old master? Yes, of course, sir. There he is, looking out the window.
I only asked.
I don't care what she's worth; I wish she had never come here.
It was only by chance that you yourself were saved.
Well, I'll go even though I don't want to.
And I say that this house is as dark as ignorance, and ignorance is as dark as hell. And I say that no man has ever been abused like I've been. I'm no more crazy than you are. Ask me any question and I'll prove my sanity.
I come here exhausted, like a dog bringing up the rear of the pack during a hunt. I've spent almost all my money, have been thoroughly beaten up tonight, and all I have for all this is some painful life experience. So, I'm going to return to Venice a little wiser and a lot poorer.
Farewell, brave Moor. Be good to Desdemona.
The general should know about this. Perhaps he doesn't see this, or he only sees the virtues in Cassio and is blind to his faults. What do you think?
Three or four thousand gold coins is all we need to retire quietly and give up the business.
Twenty crowns? I'd bet that much on my hawk or my hound, but I'd bet twenty times that on my wife.
Good morning, good Lieutenant. I am sorry for what has happened to you, but I'm sure everything will turn out okay. The general and his wife are talking about the situation, and Desdemona is speaking up for you. Othello says that the man you hurt is well-known and well-liked in Cyprus, and that he has no choice but to refuse your appeal. But Othello insists that he still loves you, and doesn't need any persuading to put you back in your position when he gets the opportunity.
Sir, you'll hardly believe this, but you have to because the one who sent me is about to arrive: Polixenes sends you his greetings. He asks that you hold his son hereyou see, his son ran away from his father and his responsibilities with a shepherd's daughter.
[Whispering] Out of here, you scab!
Mistress, how are you?
You are the captain of all fools.
It's not bad.
[To GONZALO] With his magic, my master could see the danger that you, his friend, are in. He sent me to keep you all aliveor else his plans would die along with you. [Singing in GONZALOs ear] While you lie here snoring, Cold-blooded conspirators Are about to seize their chance. If you want to live, Wake up and beware! Wake up! Wake up!
Oh, that memory is still so vivid to me! He did indeed die on the day my sister turned thirteen.
Sir, it's true that there are tricksters out there, so it's always smart to be aware.
True. Except anything you could actually use to live.
We did respect the time, sir, in the beat of our songs. So go hang yourself!
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] Madam, you're not exempt from this.
At Ely House.
That was always the job of a villain or a fool. Do you like it?
Please, listen to me speak.
Hello, Lord Stanley, what's the news?
No, madam. Weve selected the things that would be best for me to wear at the ceremony tomorrow. So, if its all right with you, please leave me alone now. Let the Nurse stay up tonight with you. Im sure your hands are full getting ready for this sudden marriage celebration.
Get away, you son of a bitch! Your life makes me angry enough to die. I swoon just looking at you!
Poor Romeo! He is already dead: stabbed by the black eye of a fair-skinned girl, cut through the ear by a love song. The very core of his heart has been split by blind Cupids arrow. Is he really man enough to fight Tybalt?
Very clever, really, very clever. Well, go along now. If only Sir Toby would stop drinking, you'd be a woman who was as funny as any person in Illyria.
You'll be my husband, then?
Send for the Count. Tell him about this. Well move the wedding to tomorrow morning.
Things for the cook, sir. But I dont know what exactly.
You haven't seen anything, then?
Stop, you who bear that corpse, and set down your load.
Me, my lord?
I heard that news, my lord.
The Turks are heading for Cyprus with a strong fleet. Othello, you know the strengths of the place the best. And although we have someone stationed there who is very skilled, everyone seems to think that you would be better in that position. So, you must tinge the happiness of your recent marriage with this difficult mission.
You wouldnt dare, coward.
I could stand here forever, too, just looking.
What are you doing, Lavinia? Marcus, what does this mean? She wants to see one of these books. Which book? Open them, boy. [To LAVINIA] Youre a better reader than mecome and take any book from my library, and so distract yourself from your sorrow until the heavens reveal who did this to you. Why does she lift her arms up twice?
If we're friends, let's do it. I am dog at singing catches.
So will I, Sir Gremio. But wait, let me have a word with you first, please. Though we've always been opponents, never allies, when you think about it, it's now important to us both that we regain access to our fair mistress, so that we can once again be friendly rivals competing for Bianca's love. But first we have to work to achieve one thing.
How is it going now? Othello looks gentler than before.
Did you intend to do something wrong, or did you already do it? If its the first, no matter how bad it is, Ill forgive you to make you love me from now on.
Come, we'll get him into a madhouse soon enough. My niece already thinks that he's crazy. We can take it as far as we want, punishing him and having fun, until we're tired and out of breath from laughing so hard, and then we can have mercy on him and reveal the joke, and crown you, Maria, the prank's mastermind. Come on, come on!
No, sweet Romeo, you have to dance.
Oh, it's too true.
Hortensio, what's all this talk about?
This wretched man has confessed to some of his evil doings. Did you and he conspire to kill Cassio?
When will he be here?
What was your dream?
I think you do. And it's precisely because I know you are full of love and honesty and think carefully before you speak that I'm even more worried about the way you're hesitating. In some disloyal liar, it wouldn't mean anything, but in an honest man like you, these kinds of reactions are indications of thoughts that come from the heart which cannot be clouded by emotion.
And your goal is our goal.
You have to understand that our grievances have piled up to the point of overflowing.
If you think it's best. Poor queen!
No, come and sit down. Now go on.
What, my lord?
Yes, and it seemed like thirty years to me, as I've been banished from your bed this whole time.
And will you learn from me?
Good day.
[To himself] Is she a Capulet? Oh, what a price Ive paid! My life is now owned by my enemy.
[Offstage] Madam!
I've heard that it means that. Oh these men, these men! Tell me, Emilia: do you think that there are women who deceive and cheat on their husbands as badly as men do to women?
[To the SHEPHERD] He seems to have a lot of power. Let's make friends with him and give him a little money. You can control even power with money; give him a few coins and see how easy everything becomes. Remember he said we're condemned to be "stoned to death" and "skinned alive!"
As much as I could gather, he accuses the duke because he thinks he poses a threat to your highness, not for personal reasons.
I say, I wouldn't do that in this company. Is that really what you meant by "accost her?"
What? Is it because my legs are too long?
Well, I dont know what to say.
Oh, my! Time goes by slowly when youre sad. Was that my father who just rushed away?
Definitely.
Well, so be it, then. [The JAILER leaves] [To herself] This is a lot of hullabaloo to make an innocent woman look guilty. [The JAILER comes back in with EMILIA][To EMILIA] How's Hermione doing?
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship. Today, on way here, I stopped therebut I will grieve you to report the rest.
I brought it up many times. You didn't listen to me.
Oh, woe is me!
You toad, you toad, where is your brother Clarence? And little Ned Plantagenet, his son.
That's very virtuous and Christian of you to pray for those who have harmed us.
Then know that from my soul I love your daughter Elizabeth.
Here comes Baptista. Look appropriately serious, sir.
Me.
I must ask you some questions then, my holy lady. Please answer them, my virtuous little mouse.
If I were your position I wouldn't follow him. So why do you?
Now old Queen Margaret's curse has fallen on our heads, when she condemned me, Hastings, and you for standing by while Richard stabbed her son.
They haven't been commanded to do so, mighty king. If it would please your Majesty, I'll gather up my friends and meet your Grace wherever and whenever your Majesty wants.
Here, sir, and just as foolish as I was before.
Can sick men make such amusing puns on their names?
I cant stop wondering about those shapes and their movements and sounds, which expressedeven without being able to speaka kind of incredible mute language.
I'm glad to see you're healthy, sir.
Well, he has an income of three thousand ducats a year.
Yeah, but the days have become shorter for him, because you should remember that the path of extravagance descends like the sun in winter, even if it does not regain its height the following year. And I'm afraid that Lord Timon's estate is withering, no matter how hard he tries to recover money.
I'll force you to give in to my desire.
The stroke of death is more welcome to me than Bolingbroke is to England. Lords, goodbye.
Do you know anyone who can be tempted with gold into secretly killing someone?
I will, my lord.
Kinsmen, his sorrows are past fixing. Join the Goths, and by going to war take revenge on Rome for this ingratitude, and on the traitor Saturnine.
My lord, Bolingbroke has changed his mind: you must go to Pomfret, not to the Tower. And madam, hes ordered that you must go to France.
That's why we're bothering you so earlyit's not our fault.
This food will do your heart much good, Apemantus!
I must obey your will. My comfort is that the sun that warms you here shall shine on me, and the golden beams that look down on you here will also make my banishment more bearable.
[To RICHARD] Richard, it's your wife, wretched Anne your wife, who never had a quiet hour of sleep with you. Now I've come to fill your sleep with disturbing thoughts. Tomorrow in the battle, remember me and drop your blunted sword. Despair, and die!
Exactly the way she used to stand! [To HERMIONE] Statue, if you would reprimand me, I'd say you were the real Hermione. Actually, you're more like her because you're not reprimanding me, considering she was as sweet as a baby and as gentle as grace itself. [To PAULINA] But, Paulina, Hermione didn't have that many wrinkles. She wasn't as old as this statue seems.
Wait a second! Did you offer her this dog from me?
Whos the one going out the door?
Well, I'll go to Bristol castle now for safety; the Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
Hide in my study.Just a minuteFor the love of God, dont be so stupid! Im coming. Im coming.
Forgive him, Timandra. His mind has been muddled and lost in his troubles.[To TIMON] I have only a little money left, Timon, and the lack of it makes the possibility of revolt greater and greater each day in my poor band of soldiers. I have heard and felt sorry for how Athens left you high and dry, completely forgetting you and your great deeds when neighboring states would have defeated the city had you not protected it with your sword and your wealth.
Exactly, sir. He was sad to part with her, his daughter, and we've just come from there to follow my father's instructions to visit you. I didn't bring my gentlemen and servants hereI sent them back to Bohemia to tell everyone about our marriage, and that my wife and I have arrived safely here.
[Pestering FLAVIUS] Can we talk, please?
Ignore your conscience, and think about the devil instead. He might flatter you, but he won't make you sad.
You told a liea horrible, damned lie. I swear by my soul, it was a lie, a wicked lie. Desdemona, unfaithful with Cassio! Did you say with Cassio?
[To STEPHANO] Look, hes making fun of me! Will you let him do that, my lord?
It was Helicanus back then.
Good. Now come, my Ariel! It's better to bring an extra helper along than to need a spirit and not have one. Appear, quickly! No talking. Watch! Be quiet.
Many thanks, Tranio, for the good advice. If Biondello would come ashore, we could get ready at once and find a place to stay. Then we would have a place to entertain the friends we'll make here in Padua. But wait a minute. Who are all these people?
Why are you acting with such ridiculous arrogance in front of my lady?
I wont hire any bad cooks. Ill test them by making them lick their fingers.
And yet I didn't come well.
Be patient, and don't be so hard on yourself.
Sir Topas!
This is God's fight; for God's substitute, His deputy anointed in His sight, has caused his death. If it was wrong, let heaven take revenge; for I will never lift an angry arm against His minister, the king.
Why, what is it, my lord?
Go on ahead with your findings. I'll go and see if the bear is gone and, if there's anything left of the gentleman, I'll bury it.
Excellent! I can smell the trick.
And why is that, my lady of such wisdom? Shut up. Go chatter with your gossiping cronies.
I'm more serious right now than I usually am. You should be too, if you listen to me. If you follow my advice you will become three times as powerful as you are now.
Before the tears began running all down her face over you, she was the fairest creature in the worldand still she has no equal.
I'll stay a month longer then. I must be the strangest fellow on earth. Sometimes my greatest pleasures are masquerades, plays, and dancing.
Very well, my good lord. I'll do it.
Shame, shame on her! She could convince even the most hot-blooded man not to have sex. We either need to have someone sleep with her or get rid of her. When she's supposed to be fulfilling her customers' desires (and giving me the profit), instead she's up to all her shenanigans: her excuses, her better excuses, her prayers, begging on her knees. She could turn the devil himself into a born-again Christian if he so much as tried to kiss her.
Why, Romeo, have you gone crazy?
Thats not the song.
I wish he could hear that I had saved his brother. You take the reward, and tell him what I've said. I'm sorry that the Duke of Clarence has been killed.
Than for men to be unfaithful! That's true. Oh heaven! If only man could be faithful, then he would be perfect. Because one mistake fills him with faults, he commits so many sins. Being unfaithful gets old very fast. What is in Silvia's face, that I can't see more clearly in Julia's with faithful eyes?
May it please your honor that Lord Lucius, out of pure kindness, has presented to you four milk-white horses wearing silver trappings.
My purpose is indeed a horse of that color, so to speak.
My lord!
Bring Malvolio herebut no, now I remember, they say that the poor gentleman is mentally confused. My own distracting madness made me forget all about him. [To the FOOL] How is he, fool?
I am the most suspected, and least able to defend myself, because I was here at the time of this terrible murder. Here I stand, to be questioned and punished. I have already condemned myself.
I will, my lord.
You can't read?
In the name of God and the king, say who you are and why you come wearing knight's armor, who you're fighting against, and why. Speak truthfully, by your knighthood and your pledge of loyalty. Heaven help you to defend your honor and bravery!
Mowbray, our eyes and ears are impartial. If he were my brotherno, even my son and my kingdom's heirrather than merely my father's brother's son, I vow by the power of my sword that such nearness to our sacred family's blood would not make me more likely to favor him, or compromise my judgment. He is our subject, Mowbray, and so are you. So I allow you to speak freely and fearlessly as well.
Consent to wear this ring.
Why, then she's the devil's mother; a happy birth.
No, ma'am.
Madam, he sends your Ladyship this ring.
No, I'll give you a kiss.
The world outside Veronas walls is like purgatory, torture, hell itself. Being banished from Verona is the same as being banished from the world, and being banished from the world is the same as death. Banishment is just a different name for death. So telling me that Im banished is like cutting off my head with a golden ax and smiling while murdering me.
It cannot be. He wept over my imprisonment. And he hugged me in his arms, and swore while sobbing that he would work to have me released.
He's cut my head open and given Sir Toby a bloody head too. For the love of God, help! I'd pay forty pounds to be at home right now.
What's the matter, dear?
Far under.
His sadness is now a part of himself.
"Good" queen?
What, is everyone asleep so quickly? I wish my eyes would close and I could sleep, so that I could stop thinking. In fact, my eyes are starting to close.
I couldn't stand to see you ruin your beauty. I would stop you if you tried to blemish it. Your beauty encourages me like the sun encourages the whole world. Your beauty is my day, my life.
I don't know, but here's the governor of Mytilene, sir, and he speaks highly of her.
In the recent storm. It seems to me that these lords are so amazed to see me that they're standing there with their mouths open. They have lost use of their reason, don't believe their eyes, and can't speak. Whatever has shocked you out of your senses, know for certain that I am Prospero. I am the duke who was thrown out of Milan and landed on this same island where you were shipwrecked, and became the lord of it. That's enough of this story, because it's a tale that would take days to tell. It's not something you can describe over breakfast, and it's not appropriate to discuss during this first meeting.[To ALONSO]  Welcome, sir. This hut is my royal court. I have just a few servants here, and none elsewhere on the island. Please, take a look around. Since youve returned my dukedom to me, Ill give to you something just as nice in return. Ill show you a wonder that will please you as much as my dukedom pleases me.
Sir, please stop believing this sick lie, and soon; it's really dangerous.
And he will smite you with that same vengeance for breaking your oaths, and for murder too. You swore a holy oath to fight for the house of Lancaster.
A duke who is as noble in his character as he is in his rank.
[Singing] Sir Toby, that's a lie.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas!
It's not worth my thinking about it. What about you, poet?
What do you want?
That is so weird! God as my witness, I am ashamed to hear that such an honorable man was denied a loan. There is no honor at all in that, and when I think of myself, I must say I have received many gifts from him: money, silver, jewels, and other thingsthough nothing compared to what he gave Lucullus. If Timon had foregone Lucullus and asked me for a loan, I never would have denied him so much.
Come here, please. What the hell is going on? Why is everyone yelling at me about overdue payments, which I promised to pay a long time ago?
And I come as Isidore's. He wants you to pay him back as soon as possible.
But this Cassio I mentionedhe brings good news about the Turks' losing their ships, but he looks sad and hopes that the Moor is safe at sea. Their two ships were separated by the foul, violent storm.
Oh, poor man! A million punches and kicks can do a lot of damage.
[As LITIO] And you'll stop his lesson once I am in tune?
Will I let myself be tempted by the devil like this?
It seems to be mild and gentle, and to have a temperate climate.
Yes, that proclamation has been made, my lord.
You've misused yourself.
Have you ever seen someone as furious as Timon just now?
No.[To ANTONIO] For you, wicked sir, whom I couldn't call my brother without making myself sick, I forgive even your worst sinand every sin as well. All I require is for you to return my dukedom to mewhich, of course, I know you have to give me.
Friends, I'll share with you the last bit of money I have. Wherever we next meet, let's still be friends for Timon's sake. Let's shake our heads and say, "We have seen better days," to honor our old master's fortune.[He puts out his hands] Let's each take a bit of what's left. Put out your hands, and without saying one more word, let's all part poor in money, but rich in sadness.
Ha, listen to that! She's like a galloping horseonce she gets it into her head, I have to let her go.
I swear, I will. So let's stop talking about it. She's marrying me, not my clothes. If I could fix my bad qualities as easily as I could change out of these ugly clothes, it would be good for Kate and even better for myself. But what a fool I am for standing here chatting with you, when I should say good morning to my bride and seal our bargain with a loving kiss!
What time is it?
Good lord, you're being robbed! You should be ashamed. Get dressed! It's like your heart is burst open and you're bleeding away your very soul. At this very momentright nowan old black ram is having his way with your white lamb. Get up, get up! Ring the bell and wake up all the snoring citizens, or else that devil will make you a grandfather. Get up!
Then remain still while I pray.
She's sitting over hot water to sweat out STDs like yourselves. If only we had known about you all at the Corinth whorehouse!
Cant I speak?
Ill look at him with the intent to like him, if looking at him moves me to like him. But I wont let myself fall for him any more than your permission allows.
Sure.
Fitzwater, you are damned to hell for this.
[Gesturing toward the high table] Sir, there's your place.
Forgotten you! No, sir. I could not forget you, for I've never seen you before in my life.
Now, continue with your story. Trinculo, please, stand farther away.
My legs stand under me better than I understand you, and what you mean by "try your legs."
No more than I mourn for yours, from the depths of my soul.
I hope the ship they see is the one carrying Othello.
Yes, but time will tell
I hate you worse.
This, thisno more, gods! All this goodness makes the past pain seem like nothing. You'll do well if, when I kiss her, I melt and am never seen again! Oh, come and let me hold you. [PERICLES and THAISA embrace]
No, really, I'm being honestwe can't compete with such over-the-top, such amazingI don't even know what to say. We'll have to spike your drinks so that you get really groggy and won't be able to compliment or criticize our party.
Good madam, let me see your face.
Oh, sir, the meaning is deeper than you think. Take off my mistress's gown for his master's use! Oh, shameful, shameful, shameful!
Sir, if you've told the truth just now at Diana's altar, this is your wife.
It's more amazing that an angel should be so angry. You divinely perfect woman, please allow me to clear myself of these crimes of which you've accused me.
My lord wants to speak. It's my duty to be silent.
Ive never in my life seen him this angry and upset.
Yet you began rudely. Who are you? What do you want?
Tell him.
Forgive me, sir, for not being a better host.
Give me your hand. Im starting to want to spill some blood.
[As VINCENTIO] Who's that trying to break down the door?
[To VIOLA] Oh, you lying little puppy! How much worse will you be when you're old and gray? Or will you get so good at being crafty that your own tricks will trick you? Farewell, and take her; but go somewhere where you and I will never meet again.
What then?
Yes, yes. Oh, lay me down next to Desdemona.
[To himself] I wish I had a mind like yours! He's figured out the meaning, but I'll talk him out of it.[To PERICLES] Prince of Tyre: though, according to our law, I could kill you for not giving me a correct answer, I'll give you some more time on account of your noble blood and your way with words. If, in forty days' time, you reveal the secret, I'll welcome you as my son-in-law with a celebratory feast worthy of myself as a king and you as a prince.
Why?
Believe me, I will. With your help, I have a suit of armor. In spite of what the sea did to me, I still have this valuable ring, which I'll sell to buy a horse so beautiful everyone will love to see me riding him. And yet, my friends, I still need some jousting equipment.
[To FERDINAND] My son-in-law, you look troubled, as if something has made you upset. Cheer up, sir. The show is now finished. These actors, as I told you, were all spirits, and theyve melted into the air, thin air. And like this visionwith its towers reaching to the clouds, its gorgeous palaces, its grand temples (which in fact have no underlying structure)the actual world, and everyone living in it, will dissolve just as this illusion has disappeared, leaving not even a wisp of cloud behind. We are all made of the stuff of dreams, and our small lifespans stretch from the sleep before birth to the sleep after death. Sir, Im upset. Please put up with this weakness of mine. My old brain is troubled, but dont be disturbed by it. If you would like to, you can go to my hut and relax. Ill take a little walk to calm my restless mind.
[To GONZALO] First, my noble old friend, let me hug you. Your honor is so great it can't be measured or contained.
[As LITIO] Sir, to prove to you what I've said, stand by right here and watch how this fellow teaches her.
That's your superstition.
I have to admit, I'm not a fightermy heart's too weak. I'll bet he knew that.
I know it is the moon.
For now he wants less. I wouldn't speak with such urgency about this if it were a joke.
Silence is as useful to a bawd as a reputation is to a virgin.
Madam, bowling!
If I'm a wasp, then you'd better beware my stinger.
[As CAMBIO] Well, let him sprint ahead for now. He's not likely to finish the race.
So Timon
Tranio, let's go. One more thing still has to be done, and it's up to you to arrange it. You have to become another suitor to Bianca. Don't ask me whyjust trust that I have a good reason for doing this.
Was that my handkerchief?
Tranio, I saw her coral-pink lips move, and her breath perfume the air. Everything I saw in her was holy and sweet.
What do you mean by that, Malvolio?
Oh, but they say people are more likely to listen to the last words of dying men: when words are few, they rarely miss their mark, for those who speak when they're close to death are always truthful. The person who will soon have nothing to say is listened to more than the young, who tend to ramble on and waste words; the death of a man is more notable than his life before. Like the setting sun or the final note of a piece of music, what comes last is sweetest and most memorable. So although Richard would rather not hear my advice, the sad story of my death may make him listen to me.
I scolded you for obsessing, not for loving, my student.
I flew over these walls on the wings of love. No stone wall can keep love out. Whatever a man in love can do, love will make him attempt to do it. Therefore your relatives cant stop me.
Just tell me the important part. I'll excuse you for skipping the praise.
Sir, she's from Libya.
He knew that she was unfaithful in her marriage?
My lord, I dont know and I cant guess. Unless shes suffering from some fit or madness, for Ive often heard my grandfather say that extreme grief makes people mad, and Ive read that Hecuba of Troy went mad from sorrow. That made me afraidalthough, my lord, I know my noble aunt loves me as dearly as my mother ever did, and would only in madness have ever frightened meand I threw down my books and ran, but perhaps for no reason. Forgive me, sweet aunt; and madam, if my uncle Marcus comes with us, Ill gladly go with you.
We haven't yet set the date for the triumphant coronation day. In my opinion, tomorrow is too sudden, for I myself am not as well prepared as I would be if a later date were set.
Who is that, my lord?
Do your best, then.
He's wearing armor; oh, and he looks worried! Uncle, for God's sake, speak comforting words.
Oh, look: the precious passengers of the ship have come on shore. You, men of Cyprus, kneel down. Hail, lady, and may the grace of God be all around you.
God bless you, Timon?
A giving hand. It used to be that people's hearts controlled whether they gave someone their hand in marriage. But now people give away their hands without consulting their hearts.
Truthfully, I'm glad about that.
Her husband, fool. Are you going to tell on me?
Sir, you've been generous here in Ephesus. Thousands of people have been cured by you and are loyal to you. Not only your knowledge and your personal effort, but also your charity, Lord Cerimon, have built a reputation that will last forever.
And, Norfolk, throw down his.
Uncle Marcus, since my father wants me to come back to Rome, Ill do it.
I dont dare, sir. My master thinks Ive gone from here. He threatened to kill me if I stayed to watch his actions.
The darkness of night will hide me from their eyes. And if you dont love me, then let them find me. Id rather they killed me in hatred than experience the prolonged death of life without your love.
Two thousand gold coins a year from his land!
Hey, cut that out!
And, ma'am, I'll have to stay in the room to monitor your conversation.
Well, come on then, my Kate. We'll just go on to your father's house dressed in our plain, respectable clothes. Our purses will be proud and our clothes will be poor. It's the mind that makes the body rich, after all, and just as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds, so honor can be seen through even the lowliest attire. What, is the jay more precious than the lark because his feathers are more beautiful? Or is the poisonous snake better than the eel because his patterned scales please the eye? Certainly not, good Kate. Therefore you aren't any less precious because of your poor clothes and lowly attire. If you consider it shameful, then lay the shame on me. So cheer up! We will go now to feast and party at your father's house.
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house; for God's sake, treat her fairly. Tell her I send her my kind regards; take special care that my greetings are delivered.
Yes, and you and everyone else will find that out when he comes home. But why am I talking about this? Call in Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and all the rest. Make sure their hair is slicked down and combed, their blue coats are brushed, and their garters are normal-looking and matching. Have them do an elaborate greeting and not dare to touch a hair of my master's horse's tail until they've kissed their hands. Are they all ready?
And I swear as well to abide by all these conditions.
You lie.
I fear were going to arrive too early. I have a feeling this party tonight is fated to set in motion some awful destiny that will result in my own untimely death. But whoevers in charge of my fate can steer me where they want. Lets go, my lusty friends!
I did this because you asked me to with your own words, my lord.
Oh, you gods! Why do you give us good things that we love and then take them away? Those of us on earth hardly know what to do.
Really?
Go bring them here. If they refuse to come, give them a beating on my behalf to get them out here to their husbands. Go on, I say, and bring them here right away.
What is his name?
Yes, madam. He wants to reconcile Richard with your brothers, and your brothers with Lord Hastings. He has just summoned them all to his royal presence.
Oh, Iago!
And how are you, daughter Katherine? Are you sad?
I think one of them is around here, and cannot run away.
What kind of woman is she?
Very well then, sir.
"Satisfy!" "Satisfy" my wife's invitation! That says it all. I've trusted you, Camillo, with my darkest secrets. I've confessed my soul to you as if you were a priest, and you've cleared my conscience and helped me to be a better man. But now I see I was wrong about you. I thought you were a good man, but you're not!
No, I'm telling you, put on this robe and beard. Make him believe that you're Sir Topas the priest. Do it quickly. I'll call Sir Toby while you're getting dressed.
Ive never done you harm. In fact, I love you more than youll be able to understand until you know the reason behind my love. And so, good Capuletwhich is a name I love as dearly as my ownbe satisfied.
I can't think about what I was before; I can only think about what I am now, which is cold. I'm freezing down to my veins and barely have enough life left in me to warm my tongue up to ask you for help. Please help me, or at least, when I'm dead, make sure I get a proper burial.
He must be a stranger, since he showed up with such a strange outfit.
My lord, he hasbut you can be sure that he'll deny it.
Wearing royal clothes, scented with perfumes and spices! With a passport, too! Apollo, help me read what this says. [He picks up a scroll and reads from it]  "To whoever's reading this, if this coffin ever comes to land: I, King Pericles, have lost my beloved wife. If you've found her, please give her a proper burial. She was the daughter of the king. Take this gold as payment for your service. May the gods bless you!"[To the absent Pericles] Pericles, if you're alive, I feel sorry for you. She must have died tonight.
I will say this. If Alcibiades wants to kill my fellow citizens, let Alcibiades know that Timon does not care. But if he wants to pillage Athens, grabbing old men by the beards and sacrificing holy virgins to the horrors of war, then let him know that even as I pity the old and the young, I cannot help but say still that I do not care if he does his worst. Their blades do not care that your throats suffer the consequences of their actions. And as for me, I put the smallest switchblade in their rebel barracks before the most honored throat in all of Athens. I leave you to the protection of the gods, the way I might leave thieves to their jailers.
Does he know about this?
So his bankruptcy has just been a test for his friends.
No, not a penny. Forget about it, Saint Jeronimy. Run off to bed now and play with yourself.
[Outside] Open this locked door, foolish king: will you make me speak in this treasonous way to you when I'm trying to protect you? Open the door, or I will break it open.
May heaven restore your sanity!
Then you must have killed many of his men?
My lord, Cassio has killed a young Venetian named Roderigo.
What are the chances of his recovery, lords?
Let it be, let it be. I wish I were dead. Except . . . I think . . . already . . . who made this? [To POLIXENES] Look, doesn't it look like it's breathing? Doesn't it look like those veins have blood running through them?
No, my girl! It eats and sleeps and has the same senses as we do. The gentleman you see was in the shipwreck. And, even though hes marked by griefwhich always spoils beautyyou could describe him as handsome. Hes lost his friends and is wandering around trying to find them.
[To herself] God slept when my holy husband Henry died, and my sweet son Edward.
Go on; I'll be right behind you.
This is fairy gold, boy, you'll see! Hold on to it tight. Let's get on home now. We are lucky, boy, and to hold on to our luck we need to keep this under wraps. Let the sheep go. Let's get on home now, boy!
Sir, it is the Moor.
True. The dogs love you because you only have enough means to keep a dog.
Whats that letter you have? Why do you look so pale? Let me see it.
It seemed like you were going to try to expose us for lying, but you've just revealed that you're the liar.
Drink when I tell you to, servant-monster. Your eyes look sunk into your head.
May the gods strike those you war against, and after you win, you as well!
Ive been waiting for you for a long time. Welcome to my sad house, dreaded Fury; Rape and Murder, youre welcome here, too. You look so much like the empress and her sons! You would look even more like them if you had a Moor with youcouldnt you find such a devil in hell? For I know that the empress doesnt go anywhere without a Moor, and if youre trying to look like her, it would be convenient to have a devil like that. But youre welcome just as you are. What should we do?
Have you forgotten the torture from which I freed you?
I beg your pardon, lords and gentlemen who stayed awake and alertyou've caught me sleeping late.
Go and fill another room in hell.
Oh, it was loud enough to frighten a monster, or to cause an earthquake! Surely, it must have been the roar of an entire herd of lions.
Have you thought about where you'll go?
The loss of such a husband includes all kinds of harm.
Now Dorset, hug Hastings. Hastings, befriend Lord Marquess of Dorset.
Yes, my legs are strong, and they don't look bad in brown stockings. Should we have a little dance?
You should have kept one for yourself, because I have no intention of giving you one.
Oh, she was foul! I barely knew you, Uncle Gratiano, but there lies your niece, whose life I have just recently stopped with these very hands. I know this act seems horrible and grim.
I must obey. [To VIOLA] This happened because I was looking for you, but there's nothing to be done now. I'll answer for what I've done. But what will you do, now that I am forced to ask for my purse back? I feel worse about not being able to help you than I do about what's going to happen to me. You look confused, but don't worry about me.
Whats going on here?
Neither.
Sir Topas, no man has ever been as badly treated as I have been. Good Sir Topas, don't believe that I'm mad. They've left me here in this horrible darkness.
Oh, yes, Curtis, yes, so they need a fire, a fire. And leave out the water.
Hanged! By our Lady, then I've come to a good end.
Speak plainly, my son. Be clear. A confusing confession will result only in confused absolution.
For there it is, cracked in a hundred pieces. See, silent king, what I mean by this: my sorrow has destroyed my face.
Get her, Kate!
Not yet, I beseech you: I'll stay on my knees forever and never have a happy day in my life, until you give me joy again by pardoning Rutland, my son, who has offended you.
I beg you, Father.
[To ANTONIO so that only he can hear] Agreed. Tonight it is. Now be quiet.
I saw them while I was hiding behind a cluster of pine trees. I never saw men hurry away so quickly. I watched them go all the way to their ships.
She's not worthy of you, then. How old is she?
What, what, what, what? Insane logic! What is this? How can you say proud and I thank you and no thank you and not proud? You spoiled brat, dont give me these thank you no thank yous and proud not prouds. Just get yourself together for Thursday when youll be going with Paris to Saint Peters Church. And if you refuse to go, Ill drag you there. My god, you sick corpse! You worthless bit of baggage! You pale face!
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
Certainly we will, if we can. But if you hunt these bear cubs, then beware; their mother will wake, and if she sees you once, shell set the lion on youfor she lulls him to sleep while she plays on her back, and while he sleeps she'll do what she wants. Youre not much of a huntsman, Marcus; leave it alone. And come, Ill go get a sheet of brass, and with a steel pen Ill write these words and lay it aside: the angry northern wind will blow these sands through the air like Sibyls leaves.[To YOUNG LUCIUS] And what do you have to say for yourself, boy?
Psh! Have you seen my hat?
[To herself] I've sent for him. He says he'll come. What food should I give him? What gifts? For it's better to buy something than beg for it or borrow itand it's the same with youth and love. But I'm speaking too loud. [To MARIA] Where's Malvolio? He is very serious and solemn, which is appropriate for someone in mourning like I am. Where is Malvolio?
It is. Can it be done?
Emilia, come with me. Act however you want, Othello. Whatever you do, I'll be obedient to you.
Madam, I will.
I banished your son after taking advice from good counselors, including you. Why do you complain about the justice we have done?
Why are you talking in fits in startsand so impulsively, too?
Im begging you, good Mercutio, lets go home. Its hot, and the Capulets are all over the place. If we should meet up with them, well end up fighting them. Hot days like today get people all worked up and angry.
In fact, marriage is exactly what I came here to discuss. Tell me, Juliet, my daughterwhat do you think about getting married?
Alas, what is this gentleman talking about? How are you doing, madam? My good lady, are you okay?
[As LUCENTIO] But in ladies' eyes, it's youth that flourishes.
Well, how are you, Stephano?
Iago.
Leave it to me, sir.
[To PERICLES] Sir, the king, my father, just drank a toast to you.
By his voice I know that this man is a Montague.
It was no trouble, sir. I take pleasure in singing, sir.
What do you have to say for yourself, Cesario?My lord, a moment
How?
Why, whats up with Tybalt?
Wickedness, wickedness, wickedness! I think about it, and I think I can smell it, oh wickedness! I suspected it earlier. I could kill myself out of grief. Oh, wickedness, wickedness!
At the sad place, my lord, where people threw dust and garbage on King Richards head from the windows.
[Whispering] By God, I'd like to beat him up!
Sir, I hear.
Tybalt, I love you for a reason that allows me to ignore the rage I would normally feel in response to such a greeting. Im not a villain. Therefore, goodbye. I can see that you dont know me at all.
Sir, I'd planned to stay quiet until you'd pushed him to the point of swearing not to stay. You're too hard on him. Tell him everything in Bohemia's finewe heard good news yesterday. If you tell him that, he's lost his best reason for leaving.
You have news that's both new and old? How can that be?
To be poor but content is actually to be quite rich. But you can have endless riches and still be as poor as anyone if you are always afraid of losing your riches. Good heaven, defend us all from jealousy!
Yes, you must tell us your reason, Sir Andrew.
I know his walk. It's him. Villain, time for you to die!
[To ROMEO] Lets go, lets go, now while everything is still perfect.
Who's the second knight?
[To LUCENTIO] In time I may believe you, but I'm still doubtful.
Get bit! You aren't even good enough to curse.
you can have a little taste.
But wait, seeor rather, dont seemy fair rose wither. Yet still look at him, so that you can cry in pity and wash him fresh again with true loves tears. Ah, you, youre the grave where Troy once stood, the map of honor: the tomb of King Richard, not King Richard himself. You, most beautiful innwhy should sadness stay with you, while triumph rejoices in the alehouse?
I am waiting on the general here, and I don't think it would be very good for him to see me with a woman.
Go talk to him with your own voice, and tell me how he's feeling. I want this foolishness to be over soon. If we can conveniently let him go, I want to do it, for I'm now in so much trouble with my niece that I can't safely pursue this prank to its conclusion. Come to my room in a while.
You would not have been with me for anything if you werent there for the goose.
[Whispering] Bloody hell!
Is whispering nothing? Leaning against each other, touching cheeks? Rubbing noses? French-kissing? Laughing until you can't breathe? Here's one you can't ignoreplaying footsie? Hiding in corners? Counting down the minutes and hours until midnight, when, while all eyes but theirs are closed in sleep, they might be wicked in secret? Is all that nothing? Well, then, the world and everything in it is nothing, the universe is nothing, Bohemia is nothing, my wife is nothing, and everything I'm saying is nothing, if this is "nothing."
How dare you say so! He plays the violin, and speaks three or four languages word for word from memory. He has all of nature's good gifts.
Nothing; he's said all he can. His tongue is now a stringless instrument; his words and his life are finished.
Let me say just one prayer!
Where will we meet in the morning?
Get away from me, fond woman! If he were twenty times my son, I would still turn him in.
Look, an angel is walking on earthhere comes the Countess. But as for you, fellow, your words are madness: this youth has worked for me for three months. But more of that later. [To an officer] Take him away.
You'd dare to call me daughter? I swear, you've certainly shown a father's tender care in trying to marry me off to a lunatic, a crazed villain and a swearing fool, who thinks that he can force his way through with enough cursing!
Oh, I have been unjustly murdered!
Good morning to you, my noble lord.
All three of you hide in the hedge. Malvolio's coming this way down the path. He's been over there practicing his elegant manner for the past half hour. Watch him closely, if you love mockery, because I know that this letter will turn him into a starry-eyed fool. Now hide, if you love jokes!
Villain, I say, knock for me here.
No question, there are some.
Well, my uncle Clarence's angry ghost. My grandmother told me he was murdered there.
A prize, a prize, a prize!
Is that true? Then Othello and Desdemona are returning to Venice.
To save her life, I'll say she isn't.
If you forgive him, whoever prays against it, bad things will come of it. If you cut off this diseased limb, the rest of the body will live; but if you leave it, it will poison you.
Give me my veil. Come, throw it over my face. [OLIVIA puts on a veil] Let's hear Orsino's offer once more.
I can't tell if any of this is real or not.
Let me be your servant and go with youif you won't return my devotion, you'll be killing me.
Where is that damned villain Tranio, who bullied and defied me about this?
Friar, don't tell me that youve heard all this unless you can tell me how I can prevent it. If with all your wisdom even you cant help, then you must agree that my resolution to die is wise. And this knife will help me do it. [Revealing a knife] God joined my heart to Romeos, and you joined our hands. Before my hand or heartwhich are bound to Romeoare given to another man, Ill use this knife to kill myself. So either use your long experience and education to give me some advice about what to do, or watch as I use this knife like a judge to honorably resolve the extreme situation in which Im caught. Dont wait long to speak. I want to die if what you say isnt a solution.
I only learned my rudeness from the way I was received here. Who I am and what I want are as secret as a girl's virginity. I have a holy message for your ears only. It would be blasphemy for anyone else to hear it.
First, who are you?
Probably the Pandar. Or the Bawd.
You must be mistaken, sir. I'm sure no man has any reason to quarrel with me. I can't remember ever offending anyone.
And judgment and logic have been wise jury members since the time of Noah's ark.
Be prepared to learn a lot now, for a fool is reciting the words of a madman. [Reading] "By God, madam,"
Go on; go on. It's impossible for you to say too much. I deserve the most bitter words anyone can offer.
Ill bite you on the ear for that joke.
Aha, a riddle! Neither good nor bad. Why do you need to run in such wide circles when you can get straight to the point with your story? I'll ask you again: what's the news?
Madam, I've come on his behalf to improve your feelings towards him.
That's me, sir.
Thank Lord Cerimon, dear, this man through whom the gods have shown their power. He can tell you everything from beginning to end.
Am I not wise?
No, my lord.
And if I don't
I'll bet you a hundred marks, my Kate will have her on her back.
Here comes the Duke.
Sir, she doesn't care about stuff like that. The gifts she expects from me are the ones that come from the heart,  and I've given those to her already, though I haven't delivered them. You must have had some experience with love, sir, at your age . . . let me explain how much I love her. Watch me take her handher soft, pure white hand. [He holds PERDITA's hand]
I pity you.
He'll release him.
My lord Sebastian, despite the truth in your words, what you're saying is unkind and inappropriate at this time. Youre rubbing salt in his wounds when you should be bringing him bandages.
Man, come here; dont say anything else, but just bring your pigeons to the emperor; youll get justice from him, for my sake. Wait, wait; heres money for your trouble. Give me pen and ink. Man, can you deliver a petition gracefully?
Go to sleep, and we'll laugh.
Where do you sleep here Timon?
Now lets do this quickly.
Because of the way love has oppressed your heart.
We can't let this go on any longer without challenging it.
She has an inviting eye, and yet I think she's very modest.
It was. What sadness is making Romeo's hours so long?
Aw, please buy some! I love a printed ballad, since if they're printed they must be true.
I can't decide if I should leave in silence or bitterly scold you. I don't know which response is more appropriate to my rank and your social position. If I say nothing, you might think that my silence means consent, and you'll assume that I agree to bear the golden burden of responsibility that you're foolishly trying to impose on me. But if I scold you for this request just after you've proven your faithful love for me, then I would be guilty of rebuking my friends. Therefore I will speak, and so avoid the first possibility, but with my words I will avoid the second. So this is my answer, once and for all: I thank you for your love, but I don't deserve to be king. So I must turn down your noble request. Even if all obstacles were removed and my path led straight to the crownmy proper birthrightmy poverty of spirit and my many other flaws would still make me prefer to hide from my greatness, rather than be swallowed up by it and be smothered in glory. I am only a small boat, unprepared for the stormy sea of kingship. But, thank God, there is no need for me to rule. The royal tree has left us royal fruit, which, with time, will fit the throne well, and make us all happy as our king. I lay on him the responsibility you want to lay on me, as it is his birthright and his happy destiny. God forbid that I should steal the crown from him.
[As VINCENTIO] Swear, if you dare.
I don't know.
Ill follow after you.
Oh, insatiable and lustful woman!
Well, your imprisonment won't be for long. I'll free you, or else go to prison in your place. In the meantime, have patience.
You need to have faith. Everyone stand still. And anyone who thinks I'm doing something I shouldn't can leave.
[Returning] His name is Romeo. Hes a Montague. Hes the only son of your greatest enemy.
I can't believe this about Desdemona. She's such a good, blessed woman.
Yeah, him. He wanted to do it as soon as he heard the proclamation, but then groaned and swore he would see her tomorrow.
When I was born, the wind was from the north.
Are you seriously provoking us? In just a few words we can have an enormous impact. We banish you forever.
He's well-spoken.
Yes. It looks rotten like you.
You will be a tutor and offer to teach the girl. Is that your plan?
Hey there, Cassio!
I swear by my virginity at age twelve, I told her to come. What is this?! Heaven forbid! Where is that girl? Juliet!
Well, what's the news?
I have too few words of thanks, for I'm not eloquent enough to speak the pain in my heart.
Sign your divorce, sir[He takes off his disguise] I can hardly call you my son now; I wouldn't stoop down to your level. Look at you, a prince, dressed up with a shepherd's staff! [To the shepherd] You old traitor, it's too bad that by hanging you I won't be shortening your life that much.[To PERDITA] And you, you witch, as if you don't know that you're meddling with a prince.
I guarantee hell never drown, not even if the ship were as fragile as a nutshell and as leaky as a menstruating woman.
Todays dark fate will determine the future. These events only begin the sorrow that is to come.
Oh, no, he loves me and cherishes me. Go to him from me.
And turning the sun into shadow. Alas, alas, like my son, who is now in the shadow of death. Your cloudy anger has swallowed up his bright-shining beams, and now he dwells in eternal darkness. You're building your nest in our nest. Oh God, witness this injustice and don't let it go unpunished! As the Yorks won the crown through bloodshed, let them also lose it in the same way.
Sir, it's the governor of Mytilene. He heard how melancholy you were and came to see you.
Come, cousin, can you shake and turn pale, and stop speaking suddenly, and then begin again, and then stop againas if you were driven crazy from terror?
What is the matter with our cousin now?
Come, let's go and pray to all the gods for your beloved mother in her labor pains.
Saints dont move, though they do grant prayers.
I'm doing worse now since you called me lieutenant, when it's killing me that I don't have that title anymore.
I've never seen him like this. There really must be some magic in that handkerchief. I am really sad and unlucky that I lost it.
Which of my people is delaying him right now?
[Sitting down beside her] Ah, if only the earth could provide me with a grave instead of just a sad seat, then I would bury my bones, instead of simply resting them here. Oh, who has any right to mourn except for us?
You will be there, I know.
Will it always be like this with you? You ungrateful wretch, you are only fit to live in the mountains and caves far from civilization, where good manners are unnecessary! Get out of my sight![To SEBASTIAN] Don't be offended, dear Cesario.[To TOBY]Go away, you brute!
I hope you're right.
Uncle, even in the mirrors of your eyes, I see the reflection of your grief. Based on your sad expression, I will reduce your son's banishment by four years.
[To a servant] Ursula, bring my picture here. [To JULIA] Go and give your master this. Tell him, from me, that one Juliawhom he has forgotten in his changing thoughtswould better suit his room than this shadow of a picture.
Welcome, Iago. We must go be on the lookout.
You will, my lord.
Well, nothing. But he left me behind to explain the meaning of his signs and signals.
Well, they say that my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw a crust of bread at two hours old. For me, it took two full years before I could get a single tooth. Grandmother, this would have been a biting joke.
First, mighty King, tell me what your Highness wants, so I can deliver your message to him.
Beat them down with your clubs, spears, and axes. Hit them! Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Now listen, Kate: you won't escape like that.
In Algiers, sir.
Well, something's standing up and making it so I can hardly wait that long. But I would hate to fall back into my dreams. I'll wait, despite my flesh and blood.
Be quiet, foolish woman.
Well, let her disapprove of meI disapprove of her.
No you cannot even live on animals like birds and fish yourselves. You must eat men. Though I ought to thank you for at least being honest thieves who do not hide behind some more respectable disguise, for there is thievery in other professions as well. Here's some gold, you dirty thieves. Go now and drink all the wine you can until you catch a deadly fever that makes your blood foam. Do not trust the doctor, though, because his cures are poisonous and he kills men even more often than you rob them, taking both money and lives. Wreak havoc as your occupation dictates,  and like one being instructed in his occupation, I'll give you good examples of thieves. The sun is a thief for robbing water from the vast sea; the moon is a thief for snatching light off the sun; the sea is a thief as its tides surge forth, dissolve the moon into salty tears; the earth is a thief as it steals and feeds off the manure of animals. Everything is a thief, from the laws to its enforcement, which use their unlimited power to steal. And do not make yourselves the exception, go away and rob one another. Here's some more gold. Go cut some throats, because everyone you meet is a thief. Go to Athens, pillage shops, because nothing you steal will not come from a thief's pocket. Do not steal any less because I'm giving you this, more gold, which I hope may curse you! Amen.
How are you, my dear Othello? The islanders you invited to dinner are waiting for you.
My lord
[To ALONSO] Therefore, my lord
Come, sir, let's go.
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days, we were just following our lord, our rightful kingwhich you now bring up to prove that we're your enemies. And we would follow you in just the same way, if you were our king.
Oh, sir, calm yourself. I'm following him only so I can turn on him later. Maybe we can't all be leaders, but not all leaders can have loyal followers. All the time you see dutiful servants kneeling to their masters and working like mules for nothing but food. And when they get old, they're fired. These honest fools deserve to be whipped! There are others who take the appearance of duty and loyalty, but stay focused on their own interests. They put on a good show of serving their lords, and thrive in their subservient positions. But once they get enough money, they serve only themselves. These are the guys who really have some soul. That's the kind of servant I am. Believe me, as sure as your name is Roderigo: if I were the Moor, I would not want Iago as my servant. In following him, I'm really just following myself. God may judge me. I swear I'm not serving Othello out of love and duty, but merely appearing to, for my own purposes. If my outward appearance showed what my real intentions are, It would be like wearing my heart on my sleeve for birds to peck at. I am not what I seem to be.
True. Im talking about dreams, which are produced by a brain thats doing nothing. Dreams are born of no more than empty fantasy, which lack substance like air, and are more unpredictable than the wind, which can blow on the frozen north and then suddenly get angry and blow south.
Good Miss Mary Accost-her
Whether you love me or love me not, I like the cap, and I will have it, or I'll have nothing.
[To HORTENSIO] Look at that, sir, he is very straightforward with his intentions. Why, if you give him enough gold he'll marry a puppet, a doll, or an old prostitute with a dozen diseases and not a tooth in her head. Why, nothing can bother him, as long as money comes with it.
True. And look how well that position suits mefar better than the one I had before. Back then, my brothers servants were my equals. Now they work for me.
Forget the things that have happened to you, which we are very sorry for. The senators unanimously agreed to ask you to come back to Athens. There are many honors there, totally ready for you to take up.
Villain, you don't know the laws of God or man. Even the fiercest beast has a touch of pity.
Look who kneels here! This is your daughter, Thaisa, called "Marina" for the sea because that's where she was born.
I'll go to him.
What should you be afraid? Its nothing but some receipt for his clothes on the tournament day.
Do you see the fright in her eyes? Stay here, good gentlemen. Do you look a little pale, mistress? Keep watching her; we'll hear more about what happened soon. Watch her carefully. I beg you, look at her. Do you see, gentlemen? Guiltiness speaks, even when the guilty person holds his or her tongue.
I'll be glad to get this over with.
No, if you struggle
To please the king I did, but to please myself I cannot do it. Yet I don't know why I welcome such a guest as grief, except because I had to say goodbye to so sweet a guest as my sweet Richard. And yet again, I feel as if some unborn sorrow, ready to be birthed by fortune, is coming towards me, and my soul is afraid of something; it grieves at something more than just my parting from the king.
Oh, noble prince, I can explain everything about the unfortunate events that led to this deadly fight. There lies Tybalt, the man who killed your relative, brave Mercutio. Tybalt was then killed by young Romeo.
Oh, Lucius, that was a charitable deed compared to what you'll hear from me soon. It was her sons that murdered Bassianus, and they were the ones who raped your sister, cut out her tongue, and cut her hands and trimmed her as you saw.
Then, gentlemen, bear witness to his promise.
My my, the knight's very good at playing the fool.
Give me some music. [Music plays] Now, good morning, friends. [To VIOLA]  Now, good Cesario, have them play that old-fashioned song we heard last night. It helped ease my passion and made me feel better, more than the silly songs and memorized words of these fast-paced modern times. Come, have them sing just one verse at least.
Nurse, hes a gentleman who loves to hear himself talk. He says more in one minute than he will stand behind in a month.
[Seeing the letter] And what do we have here?
Go, go, up to the roof. The Lord Mayor knocks.
She is truly an obedient lady. I beg you, my lord, call her back.
To, to, to
Where were you born? And how did you achieve all these accomplishments?
I swear, I hardly know where I'm going myself. Have you heard the news going around?
Come along with us and you'll see the truth for yourself, if our initial joke has made you suspicious.
That? What?
Oh, I'd beat him like a dog for that!
All this drinking will be your ruin: I heard my lady Olivia talking about it yesterday. She also spoke of some foolish knight you brought here one night to woo her.
And I think I can do that tricky backward step as well as any man in Illyria.
Descend and do what you have promised.
It's taken a long time, but at last we've all been reconciled. Now that the raging war is over, it's time to smile at our past dangers and adventures. My fair Bianca, welcome my father, while I with equal kindness welcome yours. Brother Petruchio, Sister Katherina, and you, Hortensio, with your loving widow, feast with the best of them, and welcome to my house. This dessert is to close up our stomachsand any hard feelingsafter our great feast. Please, sit down, for now we sit to chat as well as to eat.
Madam, his Majesty asks for youand for you, Duke of Gloucesterand for you, my gracious lords.
What, it has to die, nurse? Then let no one but me kill my own flesh and blood.
Hit him, Aumerle. Poor boy, youre shocked. Go away, villain! Never come into my sight again.
Sir, there's a girl in Mytilene who could probably make him speak.
Christ!
No, by Saint Jamy,I'll bet you a penny,A horse and a manAre not the sameAnd yet not too different.
Get on with it, please.
I remember everything in a big haze. I can't recall the particulars. I remember the fight, but not the reason for it. Oh, why do men drink their enemy, which robs them of their senses! Why do we celebrate by willingly turning ourselves into beasts?
OrsinoI have heard my father mention him. He was a bachelor back then.
It must be good food if you cover it this way!
Are you going to leave me so unsatisfied?
And, sir, were you there when all this was said?
[Singing] Should I tell him to go?
The trumpet soundshe's coming. Don't restrain yourself.
And I missed your help, too. Your Grace, pardon me. It is neither my official position nor anything I heard about business that has gotten me out of bed. And it is not the general problem of war that brought me here. Rather, my own particular trouble is so great that it is overwhelming, and takes precedence over other problems.
Who's calling me?
Do you intend to sleep here tonight?
Why would you want to kill me?
Yes. I can read my fortune in my misery.
All right. But I'm not happy that we lost our wine bottles in the pond
I dreamed a dream last night.
When you're the last man on earth, you'll be welcome here. I would rather be a beggar's dog than you.
Will you dine with me, Apemantus?
I'm ready.
Don't worry, I'm not afraid of him.
I'll pay you for your pleasure, then.
Now let me see if I can translate it. Hic ibat Simois, I don't know you, hic est Sigeia tellus, I don't trust you, Hic steterat Priami, make sure he doesn't hear us, regia, don't presume anything, celsa senis, don't give up.
For a full half hour.
Longer, longer. Lucentios son is older than that, sir. Hes thirty.
You tell a sad tale too well, too well. Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? Where is Bagot? How have Bushy and Green let the dangerous enemy come into this country without meeting any opposition? If we survive this, they'll pay for it with their heads: I bet they've made peace with Bolingbroke.
I'm doing well, my good lady. [To himself] Oh, it's so hard to pretend I'm fine! [To DESDEMONA] How are you, Desdemona?
This knight is a beloved puppet to you, Sir Toby.
A fool that wears nice clothes, not unlike you. He can change appearances. Sometimes he looks like a lord, and sometimes he looks like lawyer. Sometimes, he looks like a philosopher with two testicles to add to the stone he uses for alchemy. A lot of times he looks like a knight, but generally he sticks to the appearances men take between the ages of 13 and 80.
Oh, horrible villain! You call that trimming?
They are like two virtuous supports for a Christian prince, to prevent him from the downfall of vanity. And see, he has a prayer book in his hand. These are the accessories of a holy man.
Do you know her?
There's plenty of time for that and to tell all our stories. Go on, all of you lucky people! Go to the feast. Meanwhile, I'll find some lonely place to mourn my husband until I die.
What? Have I said the right thing twice? When was the first time? Please tell me. Butter me up with praise 'til I'm as fat as a pig for the slaughter. If you don't compliment a good deed, you'll stop that person from doing a thousand more good things that person might have done. Your compliments are my reward. For a single kiss, you can ride me for a mile before you'd have to kick me with your spurs. Back to the point: if my most recent accomplishment was convincing him to stay, what was the first one? This accomplishment must have a sister, unless I misunderstood you. If only her name were "Grace!" There was another time I said something good? What was it? Please tell me; I'm dying to know.
Hermione, are you tongue-tied? Say something!
For the last time, get her out of here!
What, you can't even stand my presence? Now I see that she is your treasure. She must have a husband, while I must dance barefoot on her wedding day and lead apes in hell, all because you love her most. Don't speak to me, I will go cry and wait until I can get my revenge.
And then?
We don't have any silent songs, sir.
I think I am a prophet, newly inspired, and as I die I make this prediction. His bad behavior cannot last, for violent fires soon burn themselves out; small rain showers last long, but sudden storms are short; he who rides too fast will soon exhaust himself; he who eats too quickly will choke; vanity is like an insatiable vulture that feeds on itself. This royal throne of kings, this crowned island, this land of majesty, this seat of war, this other Edenalmost paradisethis fortress built by Nature as her home against disease and invaders, this happy race of men, this little world, this precious stone set in the silver sea (which acts as a wall or a moat that defends a castle against the jealousy of less happy nations), this blessed plot of land, this earth, this realm, this England, this nurse, this birthplace of royal kings who are feared and respected for their ancestry, as famous for their deeds of Christian service and true chivalry as is the tomb of Jesus! This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, beloved for her reputation through the worldis now rented out, I die pronouncing it, like a tenement or a paltry little farm. England, surrounded by the triumphant sea, with a rocky shore that beats back the jealousy of the sea god Neptune, is now fenced in by its own shame, sealed with ink blots and rotten legal documents. The England that used to conquer others has made a shameful conquest of itself. Ah, if the scandal ended with my life, I could die happy!
Old man, you're out of luck.
Then you must have a horrible message to deliver, since you're so afraid to get to the point. Speak your business.
How can you say that? His son was still a minor two years ago.
They lie in bed while dreaming about true things.
Am I a lord? Do I have such a lady? Or am I dreaming? Or have I been dreaming until now? I'm not asleep: I can see, and hear, and speak. I can smell sweet aromas and feel soft things. I swear, I must be a lord indeed! I'm not a tinker, and I'm not Christopher Sly. Well, bring my lady here before me, and I'll ask again, bring me a mug of the cheapest beer.
My lord, will you eat?
I defy your threats. Im arresting you as a criminal.
But
[As VINCENTIO] Keep your hundred pounds to yourself. He won't need anything as long as I'm alive.
If this is just another of the illusions produced by this island, then Ill lose my dear son twice.
[To herself] Oh, look how beautiful he is even in his anger and contempt! A murderer's guilt is easier to hide than feelings of love. Midday is like nighttime for lovethat's how brightly passion shines. [To VIOLA] Cesario, I swear by the roses of spring, by virginity, by honor, by truth, and by everything, that I love you. I love you so much that neither my wit nor my reason can hide my passion, despite your pride. Don't draw the wrong conclusions from this, thoughjust because I'm wooing you doesn't mean you shouldn't woo me. Use your better logic and see that love asked for is good, but love freely given is better.
If they see you theyll murder you.
Tell me again, where did you leave those villains?
Well, God give her a good rest afterwards! What sort of child has he given her?
[To the shepherd, but without him hearing] You poor father, you'll have more of this funny business to deal with after the festival.[To CAMILLO] Has it gone too far? We need to separate them. Florizel is an idiot and is about to give himself away.[To FLORIZEL] Hello there, handsome shepherd! You're distracted by love and not too focused on this party, huh? I'll tell you, when I was your age, I was a sucker for buying gifts for my girlfriend. I would have bought every piece of silk from the traveling salesman if it would have won her over, but you've let him go without buying a single thing. If your girlfriend interpreted this as a lack of love on your part, you'd be hard-pressed to convince her that you really care.
Here, kiss the Bible.[STEPHANO gives the bottle to TRINCULO] Though you can swim like a duck, you look like a silly goose.
And where is that poisonous snake? Bring the villain forward.
You cry so they can drink, Timon.
I'm not worthy to be her teacher.
[Whispering] Yes, and if you had an "I" in the back of your head, you might see more trouble behind you than good luck before you.
All right then, sir. We all pay for our pleasures eventually.
Go on, Camillo.
What's that?
That's it, I promise.
Get out of my way, unruly woman!
I thought you were sure about this.
Run after that irritating messenger who just left, the duke's man. He left this ring behind, whether I wanted it or not. Tell him I want nothing to do with it. [OLIVIA hands him a ring] Tell him not to encourage Orsino, or get his hopes up. I am not for him. And tell that youth that if he'll come by tomorrow, I'll give him reasons why. Now hurry up, Malvolio.
Come here, I tell you! Theres other work for you to do. Come here, you slow turtle! Come on!
I've practically fainted, to tell the truth.
Then he's a rogue, and I hate a drunken rogue. He spins and sways like he's doing a slow dance.
I have sent someone to tell Cassio to come speak to you.
No, she doesn't talk that much!
Sir, it might be better if someone else popped the cherry before you
God for his mercy! What a tide of woes comes rushing on this sad land at once! I don't know what to do: I wish to God, provided I hadn't done anything disloyal, the king had cut off my head with my brother's. What, are there no messages sent to Ireland? How will we have money for these wars?
That's true, when someone who has avoided God's grace is controlling that destiny. My children would have been destined to better deaths if you had been blessed with a more virtuous life.
Please, my king, be quiet. Do you see this? It's the door to his hut. Be silent and enter. Commit the good crime that will make this island yours forever. And I, your Caliban, will always be your worshipful foot-licker.
You are most welcome, your Honor.
What are you doing away from home? How are you, my most beautiful Bianca? I was actually just on my way to your house, my sweet love.
Too true, too true, sir. No woman alive compares to the woman you killed.
My shame and guilt overcome me. Forgive me, Valentine. If hearty sorrow can be enough to make up for my offense, I offer it here. I do suffer for the wrongs I've committed.
I can't do much good at all for him, unless you call it good to pity him for having lost his inheritance.
Then go, goodbye. Get enough money together in your wallet.
[To himself] Now I've seen them go into the church together. May God give them a good marriage! But who's this here? My old master Vincentio! Now everything's ruined! It was all for nothing.
Vices, yes, that's what I meant. I know this guy well: he was an odd-jobs guy, then a police officer, then he wasted all his money for a while, and then he married a handyman's wife about a mile away from where I live now. He's tried his hand at several questionable professions and has now settled on being a criminal. Some call him Autolycus.
So could I.
God be with you, sir; I will.
Well, sir, now it begins.
Listen, these trumpets announce that dinner is ready. The messenger from Venice is waiting on the food. Go inside, and don't cry. Everything will be okay.
[To himself]  Now, by the gods, I have to applaud his bravery.
I wish that I had never seen him, though!
How does Gremio like these quick-witted folks?
I'll bet you're a happy fellow, without a care in the world.
[Taking his hand] Now, sir, everyone has a right to their opinions. Please, take your hand to the dairy and let it drink.
She says it's pale.
"M"Malvolio. "M"why, that's the first letter of my name.
For shame, what a devious and perverse course the queen is taking!
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford ready for battle?
I'm strong-willed. My conscience won't overcome me.
Fellow soldiers and loving friends, all who have suffered under the burden of Richard's tyrannywe have marched this far without obstacles, all the way to the center of England. And here we receive news of encouragement and comfort from my stepfather Stanley. He says this: the wretched, violent, and usurping boar, that ruined your fields and vineyards; drinks your warm blood like water; and uses your disemboweled stomachs as his feeding troughthis foul swine is right now in the center of the country, near the town of Leicester. It's only a day's march from Tamworth, where we are now. In God's name, let's continue with cheerful spirits, my courageous friends, to reap the harvest of eternal peace from this one bloody trial of war.
And his opponent, the youth, doesn't seem to have much aggression in his face either.
I will get free from you!
Who's coming with me? Begging your pardon, Leontes, but I need some women to come with me on account of the pregnancy. [To her servants] Don't cry; there's no reason to cry. You can cry if and when you find out that I actually deserve to be in prison. What's happening here is only a chance for me to demonstrate grace. [To LEONTES] Goodbye, sir. I never hoped to see you regret something; now I'm sure I will.[To her servants] Ladies, come on, you have permission.
Welcome them and guide them to us.
Please, good Grumio, tell me, how are things out in the world?
Weak fool! Shallow, fickle woman!
Well, they've seen me more or less, or they never saw me at allhere's Aaron. What do you want with him?
Three rolls of the dice is lucky, sir, and the old saying goes "the third time's the charm." Triple-time is a good beat for dancing, and the bells of Saint Bennet's church chimeone, two, three.
Oh, my heart!
Where is the duke my father with his army?
So, Green, you are the midwife to my sadness, and Bolingbroke is the child of my sorrow: now my soul has brought forth her offspring, and I, a gasping new mother, have joined my unborn sorrow with a real one.
Then forgive me for speaking like a military man, my lords. Why do good people fight and not patiently bear the insults of their enemies? Why do they not patiently let those same enemies murder them in their sleep? If there is such honor in patience, what do we make of our wars abroad, and why are women not considered more valiant for staying at home? Why do we not deem the donkey superior to the lion, or the prisoner to the judge, if there is such wisdom in suffering? You are great men, be compassionate. Who would not sentence a man for violent aggression? You are right, murder is the greatest sin, but when it is done for self-defense it is fair. Anger is wicked, but who has not been angry before? Think about this as you judge the crime before you.
I'm happy to do as you say.
[As VINCENTIO] Away with you, mad fool! His name is Lucentio, my only son, and heir to all the lands owned by me, Vincentio.
Oh, blood, blood, blood!
[To the baby] May you have an easy life! No baby has ever had such a chaotic birth, but you seem to be quiet and gentle! This is the worst welcome to the world that any princess has ever had. It can only go up from here! This is the roughest start for a newborn that fire, water, earth, and heaven could put together as you came out of the wombyou've lost everything before you had anything at all. May the gods take note of this and bless your future!
Sir, there are three wagon-makers, three shepherds, three cowboys, and three pig-herders outside dressed up as satyrs. They call themselves "The Wits" and say they have a dance to perform, but the girls are saying its a load of garbage. But the men say that, if people aren't easily offended, they'll enjoy the performance.
We will attend you, your Grace.
How long a time lies in one little word! Four long winters and four fresh springs end in a word: such is the power of a king's wishes.
Yes, Timon, and for a good reason.
But we can, grandmother, for my good uncle Richard told me. He said that the king was provoked by the queen to make up accusations against my father that would get him arrested. When my uncle told me about this he wept, and pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek. He told me that I could rely on him as if he were my father, and that he would love me as dearly as if I were his child.
Sound the trumpets, and combatants, come forward.
[Singing] My lady is unkind indeed.
Before you can say Come and Go"and breathe twice and shout So, so!"each one of your servants, leaping on their toes, will arrive here with their gestures and silly faces. Do you love me, master? No?
You're not a complete fool.
Who cares where; let no man talk of comfort. Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs; dust is our paper, and with our tears we'll write "sorrow" on the ground. Let's  choose executors and talk of willsbut no, for what can we leave behind after we're dead, except our deposed body to the grave? Our lands, our lives and everything we have are Bolingbroke's; we have nothing to call our own but death, and the earth covering our coffin. For God's sake, let us sit on the ground and tell sad stories of the death of kings: how some have been deposed; some killed in war; some haunted by the ghosts of the kings they deposed; some poisoned by their wives: some killed while they sleptall murdered. For within the hollow crown that sits on the king's mortal head, Death keeps his court, and sits amusing himself, grinning at his power, allowing the king a breath, a little time, to be a monarch, be feared and kill with looks, feeling vain and self-satisfied, as if this thin wall of flesh were impenetrable brass. But Death comes and with a little pin breaks through his castle wall, and: farewell king! Cover your heads; such signs of respect now are just a mockery, when you know that I'm flesh and blood.  Throw away respect, tradition, all forms of royal ceremony and duty, for you have been mistaken all this while: I live by bread like you, feel want, taste grief, need friends. Subjected like this, how can you say to me that I am a king?
[Singing]Oh my mistress, where are you roaming?Oh, stay and listen! Your true love's coming:He can sing both high and low.Travel no more, my pretty sweetheart.Journeys end when lovers meet,As every wise man's son should know.
Oh, forgive me for all my sins!
What handkerchief?
I don't know a single woman, or even seen a womans faceexcept my own in the mirror. Ive also never met any other men than you, my friend, and my dear father. I have no knowledge of what people look like in other places. But I swear by my virginitythe most precious thing that I can givethat Id never want to be with anyone in the world but you. I cant even imagine that I might like any other shape besides your own. But listen to me babbling on and on, forgetting that my father told me not to.
Oh, God forgive us!
My lord, the enemy has passed the marsh. Let George Stanley die after the battle is over.
Are you really leaving tonight?
If your speech could ever please me, it would be these observations. The state of Athens has become a forest of beasts.
If youre braver with a man of your own rank, heres my gage, Aumerle: by the sun that shines on us, I hear you sayand you said it boastinglythat you were responsible for noble Gloucester's death. Even if you deny it twenty times, youre still a liar; and Ill stab you in your lying heart.
Tell me what a drunk man is like, fool.
Is she really such a splendid girl?
Where, good Mistress Mary?
Madam, not now. I don't have a good feeling about this, and don't think it's the right time.
He was? Why, then! What will be will be! The nobles are fled; the common people are cold and will, I fear, join Hereford's side.
Like a nice dream or an empty fantasy. So take him inside and start setting up the prank. Carry him gently to my finest room, and hang all my erotic paintings on the walls. Bathe his filthy head with warm, clean water, and burn fragrant wood to make the room smell sweet. Find some musicians to be ready for when he wakes, so they can make sweet and heavenly sounds for him. If he happens to speak, be ready right awaybow low and say obediently, "What does your Honor command us to do?" Let one servant wait on him with a silver bowl full of rosewater and flowers. Have another servant carry the pitcher, and a third carry a towel, and say, "Would it please your Lordship to cool your hands?" Have someone ready with expensive clothing, and ask him what he wants to wear. Have another servant tell him about his dogs and his horse, and explain that his wife has been grieving over his illness. Convince him he's been out of his mind, and when he says that he's insane now, tell him that he's just mistaken, for he is really a mighty lord. Do all this, and do it convincingly, gentle sirs. If this can be managed subtly, it will be some excellent entertainment for us.
Bonos dies, Sir Toby. As the old hermit of Prague, who never learned to read or write, said very wittily to a niece of King Gorboduc, "That which is, is." So if I'm Mr. Priest, then I'm Mr. Priest. For doesn't "that" just mean "that," and isn't "is" just "is?"
The same way men do on land: the big ones eat the little ones. Whales are like rich men, they play and tumble, pushing all the little fish in front of them, then eat them up all in one gulp. I've heard of whales like that on land, who won't stop until they've swallowed the whole parish, church, steeple, bells, and everything else.
Well, let's go to the king. The stuff in this bag will give him something to think about.
I swear on my own honor.
[To himself] Despite everything I just said, Ill hide nearby. The look on his face makes me nervous, and I have doubts about his story of what he plans to do.
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage [throws glove on the ground], abandoning here my royal bloodit's fear, not respect,  that makes you refuse to challenge me because I'm the king's cousin. If guilty fear has left you enough strength, pick it up: by that and all the code of knighthood, I'll take up arms to prove that you're guilty of all I've accused you of, or worse.
Say what you have to say: if I'm pleased with what you say, your child will live and I'll see it taken care of.
I am no whore. I am as chaste as you who accuse me.
As good as any man in Illyria, as long as he isn't better than I am. And yet I'm not as good as an experienced dancer.
We can help you with that. We'll make sure you get a pair, and I'll bring you to court myself.
Its nearly six o'clock, my lord, which is when you said our work would be done.
Yes, that's the point. At the risk of being too honest, it was against her nature not to like so many suitors of her own country, complexion, and social rank, since those who share such similarities are naturally drawn to each other. Ugh! You can practically smell a gross desire in excessive proportion and foul thoughts in such a person. But forgive me, I am talking generally and don't mean her in particular, although I do fear that she may return to her better judgment, prefer her own countrymen to you, and take back her love for you.
Indeed, the judges have sent for us.
Yes, and you come from Isidore for the same?
I hope he proves himself so; then I can respect him.
"Some achieve greatness"
Yesthe two points where your suspenders are buttoned on. If one breaks, the other will hold. But if both break, your pants will fall.
I wish that all were wellbut that will never be. I fear that our good fortune has reached its peak.
you see before you a beautiful woman. You can look, but don't touch! She's dangerous. Her beauty might lure you in, but if you're not deserving, you'll be killed just for trying to get a closer look.[He points to a pile of skeletons] Those former princes, like you, were drawn here by the rumors. They were looking for adventure, too. As you can see by their silence (and their bare bones), they're all casualties of love with no grave to speak of, except the stars above. Take a hint from their corpses and turn back now before it's too late.
You must be afraid of his moodiness or my faults, if you think there's any chance that he'll stop liking me. Is he usually fickle in his moods and favors?
[To ALONSO] Sir, we were discussing that our clothes seem just as clean as they did when we were in Tunis at the wedding of your daughter, whos now queen.
I could be "Count Malvolio!"
Five thousand.
He is a rascal that continuously makes me ashamed! Sebastian, I have taken you into service, partly because I need such a young boy who can carry out my business with discretion. There's no point in trusting that foolish man over there. But I have mostly employed you because of your face and your manners, whichif my prediction is correctare evidence of a good upbringing, fortune, and truth. Therefore, you should know that I have taken you for these reasons. Go at once and take this ring with you. Deliver it to Madam Silvia. The girl who gave it to me loved me well.
Let him get his mercy from a noose, and let devils in hell gnaw on his bones! Why should Othello call Desdemona a whore? Who does she sleep with? Where? When? How? What proof is there? The Moor has been tricked by some absolutely villainous lowlifesome base, well-known fool, some vile man. Oh God, if only you would reveal the evil people in the world and give every honest person a whip to lash the rascals with as they run naked east to west across the whole globe!
[To himself] And for dinner too, though you don't know it yet.
Cant you hear him shouting commands? Youre interfering with our work. Stay in your cabins. Youre helping the storm.
Admit it, admit, didn't that one hit close to home?
He couldnt not say it.
I didn't know that, but I saw Cassio use such a handkerchiefI'm sure it was your wife'sto wipe his beard earlier today.
Say you want to hunt rabbits. Your greyhounds are as swift as healthy stags, yes, and quicker than young deer.
I will not hold my tongue. I must speak. My mistress lies here murdered in her bed
[As Sir Topas] Don't try to talk to him, good fellow. [In his own voice] Who, me, sir? Not me, sir. God be with you, goodbye Sir Topas. [As Sir Topas] Amen. [In his own voice] Yes, sir, yes.
Enough to get a whore to retire, as well as enough to turn women into whores too. Stop bothering me and holding your skirts up, you sluts. You are not trustworthy, though I do know you will swear shaking with supposed divinity onto the immortal gods. Spare your prayers, and I'll trust your characters. Keep whoring, and the man that tries to tell you to do otherwise, be sure to stay true to your profession, seduce him, and infect him with your venereal diseases. Let that hidden fire overpower his piety, and do not betray your craft so that you may keep laboring. Cover your heads with wigs plucked from the hairs of the deadeven if they were hanged. Wear them and sin with them. Keep whoring around, with that thick makeup hiding all your wrinkles!
My Lord of Norfolk
Let's shake hands. [They shake hands] I'll swear to the prince that you're as honest and loyal as any man in Bohemia.
Better, now that your Lordship was kind enough to ask.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrences cell. I treated him with all the love I could give without breaking the proper rules of modesty.
Advancing them up to some scaffold, to lose their heads.
One of Timon's servants is coming
Oh, he's drunk, Sir Toby, since an hour ago. He was cross eyed at eight in the morning.
Foul shame on youI've already lost my patience with you all.
I heard he hasn't though. They say that my son of York has almost passed him in height.
What?
Madam, I will.
Now, fellows, you are welcome here.
By no means, good Ventidius. I helped you out of love and gave everything to you freely. No one can actually say that he gives if he receives something in return. The politicians play those kind of crafty games, and we must not do the same. If rich people ought to have faults, let them be good faults.
No, though Im bound more tightly than any mental patient is. Im locked in a prison without food. Im whipped, tortured.
Good Sir Toby!
No, no, sir.
Feste the jester, my lord, a fool that Olivia's father used to like. He's somewhere in the house.
What do you want, man? And how did you get here?
Why bother asking that? I have forgotten all men. If you agree that you are indeed a man, then I have forgotten you too.
Oh, yes, and she feels sorry for them.
Here is Lucentio, the real son of the real Vincentio. I've made your daughter mine by marriage while you were tricked by false appearances.
What's the matter with you now?
This is the place. There, where that torch is burning.
Be calm, my liegeremember who you are.
There will be no rest in any bedroom where you lie!
Well, forward, forward then! This is how things should go, smooth and straight. But wait! Someone's coming.
No; I'll go to Ireland to his majesty. Goodbye: if the heart can predict the future, the three of us will never meet again.
Camillo had the power to open themhe's done it many times at your command.
Aren't you sorry for these horrible crimes?
I wonder why. He usually wakes up at seven.
The woman who was beautiful but not too proud, who was eloquent but not too loud, who never lacked gold but never dressed too extravagantly, who held back her desires even when she could fulfill them, the woman who, when angry and able to get revenge nonetheless endured her misfortune and turned the other cheek, who was wise enough not to make foolish decisions, who could think and not share her thoughts, who could see men pursuing her but not pay them any attention . . . that's the sort of woman
Cassio has been attacked here in the dark by Roderigo and some men who have run away. Cassio was almost killed, and Roderigo is dead.
Bushy, what's the news?
Tell me what business you have there, and with whom. Tell me what's in that bag, where you live, your names, your ages, how much money you have, who your parents are, and anything else that I should know.
What, must we drown in the cold water?
Please, for honor's sake, no more. If you love Prince Pericles, you'll stop. I'll do as you wish: I'll set sail to find him, as dangerous as it is out there on the seas. Let me ask you to stand the absence of the king for another year. If I can't find the Prince within that time, I'll patiently accept your appointment. If you can't wait, go and look for him; show how loyal you are by your diligent searching. Then, if you find him and bring him back, he will reward you generously.
My Lord Fitzwater, I remember the time you and Aumerle talked of these matters.
Ha, ha, ha!
Oh, you've come, Iago? You've done really well, since other men credit you for their murders .
Jesus, what a rush you're in! Cant you wait for awhile? Dont you see that Im out of breath?
Sir, the king, the king!
What! "She's busy, and she cannot come!" Is that her answer?
I am Pericles of Tyre, but tell me my drowned wife's name. Everything you've said has been completely perfect. If you get this right, you're the heir to two kingdoms and to me, your father, Pericles.
In Orsino's heart.
This warrant commands me to deliver the noble Duke of Clarence into your hands. I won't ask what this means, for I'd rather not know about something that might make me guilty later. There's the duke, sleeping, and here are the keys. [He hands them the keys] I'll go to the king and tell him that I've handed over my prisoner to you.
If I saw a Montague rascal, Id face him. Id walk on the side of the street closer to the wall, and so force the Montague into the gutter.
Oh, man, carefully! I think I've broken my shoulder blade.
Think about your sins.
Where was I?
I don't care. In that case, the heretic would be the one making the fire, not the one burning in it! I'll stop short of calling you a tyrant, but this cruel treatment of your queen on the basis of nothing more than your unsupported fantasy definitely tastes like tyranny. The world will see you as horrible and scandalous from here on out.
We are, my lord. We've come to get the warrant so we can be admitted into Clarence's cell.
[To RODERIGO so that only he can hear] Go away, I tell you. Run off and shout out that there's a brawl.
Remember the reward we'll get when the deed is done.
Saddle my horse. God have mercy, what treachery is here!
What, are you crying? Come closer. I do love you, now, because these tears show you to be a woman. You give up your manhood, because no man's eyes ever did tear up, except for lust or laughter. Pity may as well be asleep, for these are strange times, in which people weep for laughter and not in sadness.
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] Yes, before you were queen, or your husband was king, I was a beast of burden for his great affairs. I weeded out his proud enemies and generously rewarded his friends. I spent my own blood to make his blood royal.
[To GONZALO] My good lord, please dont be angry.
Wait, I'll win the bet even more completely, and show more signs of her obedience, her newly-created virtue and obedience.
Well, he's been cast down already, so it seems likely that he'll be deposed: letters came last night to a dear friend of the good Duke of York's, telling bad news.
His name is Tyrrel, my lord.
Sirs, shut him up, and don't let him say anything else.
Was the Duke of Milan thrown out of Milan so that his descendants could become kings of Naples? Oh, we should celebrate this extraordinary joy, and commemorate it in gold letters, etching them into columns that will last forever. In just one journey, Claribel found a husband in Tunis; Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife in the place where he was shipwrecked; Prospero found his dukedom on a deserted island; and all of us found ourselves when we could not control our own minds.
Tybalt is lying right there.
Traitor?
You're one of those men who want him to marry again.
My good Lord Stanley, the countess Richmond would hardly agree and say "amen" to you prayer. But even though she's your wife and doesn't like me, you can be assured, good lord, that I don't hate you for her proud arrogance.
And Julia herself gave it to me. And Julia herself has brought it here.
Yes, and tell us where she's been living, or how she's come back from the dead.
Yes, to see idiots fill up on meat and fools get drunk on wine.
Here he comes.
Come on, then. Kneel down and swear.
No, there's something more going on. Please, tell me what you're thinking to yourself, and speak even the worst thoughts you are thinking.
Ah!
[To himself] That's a nice moral.
Oh, Romeo, Romeo, why must you be Romeo? Deny your father and give up your name. Or, if you wont change your name, just swear your love to me and Ill give up being a Capulet.
Gentlemen, have your instruments been in Naples? Is that why they have that strange nasal sound?
Here I am, sir. What do you need?
I know no one like this.
Slave!
Well, go on. You've tamed a terrible shrew.
Then may black night overshadow your day, and death take your life.
My name is Roderigo.
My lord of Salisbury, we have waited ten days, and hardly kept our countrymen together, and yet we hear nothing from the king. Therefore we will disperse the army: farewell.
If he governs the country, you are definitely bound to serve him. It's unclear how honorable he is in the act of governing, though.
Please, is that true?
[Looking up to heaven] God bless you, daughter. Tell me, sweetheart: how did you escape? Where did you live? How did you get back to your father's court? You should know: Paulina told me that the oracle gave us hope that you were still alive. I kept myself going just to see you.
Quiet, please. My soul is full of sorrow.
And also tell him we want to know where he came from and who his parents are.
Lucius, which book is she searching through so frantically?
Name him.
Youd take back your vow? Why, my love?
This scene now looks less like a serious thing, and more like "The Beggar and the King." My dangerous cousin, let your mother in: I know she's come to pray that I forgive you for your crime.
Why would say that? Do you think I would make jealousy my whole life, and with every change in the moon find new suspicions? No! To doubt once is to make up your mind. I'd rather turn into a goat than devote all my time to such overblown suspicions, like the sort of jealous man you're describing. It wouldn't make me jealous for you to say that my wife is pretty, eats well, enjoys the company of others, speaks her mind, sings, plays music, and dances. When a woman is virtuous, these traits are virtuous as well. And I will not worry or fear that she may be unfaithful because I am not very desirable. She knew who she was marrying. No, Iago, I won't doubt Desdemona until I see something, and if I doubt her I'll see if I can prove it. If I get proof, there's only one thing to do: get rid of either my love or my jealousy.
Oh, what a monstrous beast, lying there like a pig! Grim death, how foul and hateful your twinsleepis! Gentlemen, I will play a trick on this drunken man. What do you think: if he were carried to bed, dressed in fresh clothes, had rings put on his fingers, a delicious feast laid out by his bed, and had finely dressed servants near him when he woke upwouldn't the beggar be confused then?
For shame, get Juliet out here. Her bridegroom has arrived.
Advise us what we should do, Aaron, and we'll take your advice. Save the child so that we can all be safe.
Right now I swear by Saint Peters Church and Peter too that he will not make me a joyful bride. Im confused by this sudden hurry. Why would I marry this would-be husband before hes even come to court me? I beg you, tell my father, madam, I wont marry yet. And when I do marry, I swear, Id marry Romeo, whom you know I hate, before Id marry Paris. Now that would be some news!
It's really sealed up tight! Did it come out of the sea?
Thats him, that villain Romeo.
Why, an Englishman could easily drink a Dane under the table, and wouldn't sweat out-drinking a German. And if a Dutchman tried to go drink for drink with an Englishman, the Dutchman would end up vomiting before they could even refill his cup.
What a good guess for such a boy!
We have always known you to be a holy man. Where is Romeos servant? What does he say about all this?
Come, tailor, let's see what you have. Lay out the gown.
My noble uncle, do you know whats causing his mood?
My own father wouldn't recognize me now.
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] You poor imitation of a queen, you meaningless decoration on my throne: why do you give sugar to this swollen spider when he's already ensnared you in his deadly web? Fool, fool, you're sharpening the knife that will kill you. The day will come when you'll wish that I could help you curse this poisonous, hunchbacked toad.
Here, fill your cup up to the brim. Here's a toast to your love for Thaisa and to all your health.
You're right, sir. What a wonder this modern age is! A sentence is like a supple glove for good witit can be turned inside out so quickly!
Sir, I told them to take you away.
God help me.
Oh Tranio, I never thought it possible or likely until it happened to me. But see, while I stood here watching this unfold, I suddenly found myself struck with love. You are as trustworthy and dear to me as Anna was to Dido, Queen of Carthage, so I must plainly confess to you, Tranio: I'm on fire, I'm burning, I'm filled with longing. TranioI'll die if I can't win this modest young girl for myself. Advise me, Tranio, for I know you can. Help me, Tranio, for I know you will.
Can't you guess what she wants from you?
Why, she already has a face of her own.
What, that they kissed in private?
This is as rude as it is strange. I beg you, please do me the favor of asking the knight how I've offended him. It must be something I've done without knowing it, not on purpose.
Me too; let's go there together.
What does Lord Stanley say? Will he bring his army?
That's a step towards love.
I thank you for saying that. I know he loves me well. But I haven't asked him out about the coronation, and he hasn't told me his preferences about it. But you can name a time, my honorable lords. And I'll give my vote on the duke's behalf. I'm sure he won't mind.
[Whispering] What, what?
Now, your gown? Why, yes. Come, tailor, let us see it. God have mercy! What is this costume? What's this, a sleeve? It's more like a cannon. What, you've carved it like an apple tart all over? A snip here and a nip there, a cut here and a slash thereit's like a sieve! What in the hell do you call this, tailor?
[To herself] And may her joy be even less than that, God! Elizabeth's honor, rank, and throne all rightly belong to me.
Could we have the pleasure, my lord Timon, of serving you in some way? That way we could express our great enthusiasm for you, and be forever happy.
[To MIRANDA] Wake up, my dear, wake up! You have slept well. Wake up.
Uh oh, look who's coming. Will we be mocked?
Let me weep for such a terrible loss.
Tybalt is dead. Romeo has been banished. It was Romeo who killed Tybalt, which is why he was banished.
Oh, I'll die if I don't reply!
Now I will question Cassio about Bianca, a loose girl that makes a living by selling herself to men. The whore loves Cassio, and it's her bad luck to attract many men but be attracted to just one. When he is asked about her, he can't help but laugh. Here he comes.
[Whispering] Oh, yes, notice that. The trail's gone cold for him.
I have no more sons of royal blood for you to murder. And as for my daughters, Richard, they'll become praying nuns, not weeping queens. So don't aim to destroy their lives.
Of course, sir, if you like.
Timon
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself, and see how he takes it from you.
The mighty dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham.
Who is her mother?
Did you see my master winking and laughing at you?
She is indebted to you, gentle boy. Ah, poor lady, abandoned and left behind! I cry just thinking about your words. Here, boy, take my purse. I give you this for the sake of your sweet mistress, because you love her. Goodbye.
If I don't, never trust me againinterpret that how you want to.
Ill get my bottle of wine back, even if it means I have to go down into that pond so the water is over my ears.
Sir Paris, Ill make a desperate present of my childs love. I think shell do whatever I tell her to do. No, Im sure she will. Wife, go to see her before you go to bed. Explain to her how my son Paris loves her. And tell her, listen to me, on WednesdayWaitWhat day is today?
Wherever you want, as long as I'm out of your sight.
[Speaking of LUCILIUS] This man is honest.
Oh, horrible plot! Oh, loyal father of a treacherous soon! Youre a clear fountain and hes the stream that muddies your water. But your overflow of goodness will redeem your son, even though hes committed a crime punishable by death.
Indeed I did. But if you remember, I didn't tell you to make it a mockery of the current fashions. Go on, hop on home, for you must hop without my money, sir. I want nothing to do with this. Get out of here, and do whatever you want with it.
My noble lord
If you are going to slander Desdemona and torture me, you can give up on praying, and showing any remorse, because it won't help you. Go ahead and pile more sins on top of the ones you've already committed, do things so horrible they'll make heaven cry and astound everyone on earth. For nothing you could do would add more to your damnation than if you should slander Desdemona more.
But as it is, we cant manage without him. He builds our fires, gathers our firewood, and performs useful work. Hey there! Caliban! You pile of dirt, you! Answer me.
Why?
Yes, it is as I said.[To the POET] And as for your fiction, the lines swell with material so fine and smooth that your art comes to equal nature. But in spite of all this, my truthful friends, I must say that you do have one vice. It's not such a bad thing, and you shouldn't try too hard to fix it.
You are both honest men and have heard that I have gold. I am sure that you have. Tell me the truth, honest men.
You're not even good enough to come with me. You are the fool.
I will not stay, if it offends you.
What the hell was that?
What in the world do you mean, boy?
What a ridiculous monster, to see a poor drunk man and think him a miracle.
I didn't.
What then?
Bring that little chest here.
I'll bring him.
We are blessed to have met this man. Very blessed.
If you have any songs that are silent, feel free to keep playing those. But, you know, the general doesn't care much for music.
This man, Lord Timon, this dependent of yours, comes by my house at night. I am a man who has been thrifty from the start, and my estate deserves an heir of better rank than this lowly waiter here.
If you make us sing, youll hear us.
You haven't gone to bed, then?
No, you don't need a hat. [He gives the hat to PERDITA] Come on, Perdita. [To AUTOLYCUS] Goodbye, friend.
Don't ask him anymore, my lord Northumberland.
What, everyone's leaving? From now on, let there never be a feast where such villains are not welcome. Burn down the house! Destroy all of Athens! Timon will from now on hate all of humanity!
Were I the king of the whole world, I would do anything to undo this. Poor Marina! She was not only a princess by blood, she was a virtuous person, the equal of any single princess on the earth by comparison! Curse you, Leonine. And you've poisoned him, too, haven't you? If you'd poisoned yourself, it would have been the punishment you deserved. What are you going to say to Pericles when he comes looking for his child?
I have, my liege.
Its no longer fashionable to talk that much. Were not going to announce our entrance with some guy blindfolded, dressed up as Cupid, and carrying a toy bow in order to frighten the ladies like some scarecrow. Nor will we introduce ourselves with a memorized speech. They can judge us however they want. Well dance for one dance, and then get out of there.
Two or three people are groaning. It's the middle of the nightthey might be trying to trick us. Let's not rush in unsafely by ourselves, without any other help.
My lord, if you hadn't shown up when you did, Lord Hastings would have taken your part. He was going to cast a vote on your behalf in deciding about the coronation of the king.
You're still keeping on the safe side of the law. Good.
You cannot make terrible sins look innocent. Valor is patience, not revenge.
If only you could see how the water is roiling and raging all the way up the beachbut that's not the point! The pitiful cries of people who are doomed! I could see 'em, and then I couldn't as the ship went up and down, to and fro, pushed around in the waves like you'd push a cork into a keg of beer. And then on land, if you'd seen how the bear tore his arm out of its socket, and heard how he cried to me for help and said his name was Antigonus, a gentleman. But back to the ship: if you'd seen how the sea gobbled them up, and the people screamed, and the sea laughed at them, and how the poor man screamed and the bear laughed at him, both screaming louder than the sea or the storm.
How poor are those who don't have any patience! Every wound must heal gradually. You know that our plan is based on cleverness and not magic, and cleverness needs time to work. Aren't things actually going well? Cassio has beaten you up, yes. But because of this he's been fired from his position as lieutenant. The fruits that blossom first are the first to ripen, and before long, we'll reap the fruits of our labors. Be patient a while longer. It's already morning, in fact. Excitement and action make time fly. Go back to your room and get some sleep. Go, I tell you. I'll fill you in more later. Now, get going.
Youre asking me to stop my tale before its finished.
A false conclusion. I hate your logic like I hate an empty wine goblet. To stay up past midnight means going to bed in the early morning, so therefore to stay up past midnight is to go to bed early. Doesn't life consist of the four elementsfire, water, earth, and air?
If you're still not satisfiedsince he didn't go with your permissionI'll tell you why he left. When he was at Antioch
What do you say for yourself, shepherd? Speak or you die.
Well, she's escaped me. Sir Tranio, you also aimed at that bird, though you didn't hit her.So here's a toast to all who have shot and missed.
Sin from my lips? Oh, how you urge me on to another crime. Give me back my sin.
That would be hard to bring about, because she won't allow anyone in to see her, not even the duke's men.
Are they from Athens?
Even tyrants wept when they heard about it.
I bless you on your mother's behalf. She prays continually for you. But enough of that. The silent hours keep passing, and dawn is breaking in the east. To be briefas the situation requiresyou should prepare your army early in the morning. Let bloody fighting and deadly war be the judges of your destiny. I can't help you in this battle as much as I'd like to, but I'll do the best I can without Richard finding out. If I act too boldly on your behalf and Richard notices, then your stepbrother, young George, will be executed in front of me. Farewell. The danger and urgency of the current situation must keep us from the long greetings and happy catching-up that friends like us, who have been separated for so long, should have. But may God grant us time for all that soon! Once more, farewell. Be brave, and do well.
No, my good lord, for that would be to forget what I never remembered; to my knowledge, I've never seen him in my life.
Really!
What? The highest-ranking? What would happen to you if the King of Naples heard you say that?
If you want to have a laughing fit, and really laugh until you split your sides, then follow me. That gullible Malvolio must have renounced Christianity, for no Christian who intends to go to heaven by his faith could ever believe the absurd, exaggerated things like we put in that letter. He's wearing yellow stockings.
What? Should I cry out the name in a groan of sadness?
I will interrogate all the world about him, and make everyone answer my questions.
[To herself] You devil! I remember those efforts all too well: you killed my husband Henry in the Tower, and my poor son Edward at Tewkesbury.
You are courageous gentlemen. Youd give the moon a helpful push if it got stuck in the same spot of its orbit for five weeks.
Oh, was she really? Ill have to tell the story again every month, since you seem to forget it. This damned witch Sycorax was thrown out of Algiers for committing so many crimes and performing magic too terrible to even describe. There was just one reason why they didnt kill her. Isnt that true?
You'd better be sure of what you're doing, sir, or what you think is "justice" will devolve into violence that only causes you, your queen, and your son to suffer.
"Should be?" Keep on buzzing, bee!
I couldn't have imagined you could speak so well; I couldn't have dreamed it. If I had had a dirty mind, your speech would have changed it. Here, take this coin. Keep going on this virtuous path, and may the gods bless you!
Well, that's an problem.
I do hope that dog dies.
I can't stay any longer.
[So only LUCENTIO can hear] Keep quiet master, here's some entertainment for us. That girl is either insane or incredibly disobedient.
It is silliness to live when life is torture? When death is the only remedy, then the best prescription is to die.
Did your boss tell you who I am?
May God grant both of you a nice day.
Get away you dumb peasant! It's sad I have to waste a stone on you.
Who do you mean?
I'll carry your purse then, and leave you for an hour.
He was right, and so indeed it is.
Oh no, oh no! My child, my reason for being, come back! Look up, or Ill die with you! Help, help! Call for help.
You both have honorable reputations. Its a pity youve been enemies for so long. But, now, my lord: how do you respond to my request?
What, you?
What is it, Biondello?
Yes, I am.
What? Yourself?
What did the philosopher Pythagoras believe about wild birds?
The one my lord called me.
By my foot, I couldnt care less.
And my letters say a hundred and forty.
Yes, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
May he live a long and wealthy life! Shall we go in?
It's unbelievable!
I didn't want to trouble you, but you seem to take pleasure in enduring suffering, so I won't scold you about it anymore.
It seems our masters should probably give up on getting their money back. Now that Timon's mad, these debts are junk.
Believe me, you've already sold us on this guy. Is he selling anything else?
Is this the same noble Moor that our whole senate thinks so highly of? Is this the person who supposedly could not be shaken by passion? The man whose solid virtue was invulnerable to anything chance or fortune could throw at it?
What is the matter, my lord?
Oh, for God's sake!
Well, you have made a foolish choice. You dont know how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not him, even though his face is more handsome than any other mans, his legs are prettier. His hands and feet and body arent much to speak of, and yet theyre beyond compare. He isnt the most courteous man, but, Id swear that hes as gentle as a lamb. So do what you want, girl. Be good. Hey, have you already eaten lunch?
Let's hope he's at the palace.
Yes, like a black dog, as the saying goes.
What excuse will we make? Or should we enter without apology?
I hold you all and your many visits so dear to my heart, there is not enough to give. I could deal kingdoms to my friends, and never tire of it. Alcibiades, you are a soldier, and therefore will never be rich. To give to you would be genuine charity, because you live among the dead, and all the lands you have are in the battlefield.
Oh, that crazy girl. But I'll be damned if don't love her! The world will end before I stop loving her.
Thank you. I know you mean that. You really do love my husband. You've known him for a long time, and you can be sure that he is only keeping his distance from you for political reasons.
You have already given me so many gifts.
Are your doors locked?
I guess we can put our pipes away and leave.
You speak with authority, but you look like a common man.
You'll grant me, you hedgehog? Then let God grant me my wish that you'll be damned for that wicked deed. Oh, Henry was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
God forbid!
Its all the same. Ill be the Montagues master. After fighting with the men, Ill be nice to the maidsIll cut off their heads.
The parties we throw might not be much to be proud of, but we make up for it with heart! Seriously
You've had a terrible experience giving birth, my dear. No light, no warmth, and a storm. And I don't even have time to bury you; I have to throw you into the sea without a coffin, straight into the depths. Instead of a tombstone and lighted lamps, you'll have whales, flowing water, and simple shells.[To LYCHORIDA] Lychorida, have Nestor bring in some spices, ink, and paper, a casket, and my jewels. And ask Nicander to bring me that fancy box. Lay the baby on that pillow, there, and go, while I say goodbye to my wife. Hurry!
I'll close the curtain. The king is so carried away, next he'll think that it lives.
I do. What of him?
Take her away. Her heart is just a little strained; she'll recover. I put too much stock in my own suspicions. Please, take care of her, get her some medicine. [PAULINA and the female servants carry HERMIONE out]Apollo, please forgive my blasphemy against your oracle! I'll make up with Polixenes, win my wife over again, bring Camillo back since I know now that he's a good guy. I was too carried away with my jealousy and got caught up with bloody thoughts of revenge. I told Camillo to poison my friend Polixenes, which would have happened if Camillo hadn't questioned my command (even though I threatened him with death if he didn't obey). He admirably told Polixenes what I had planned, then gave up his comfortable position here to help Polixenes get away. He risked everything to do what was right. His goodness glitters through my dark intentions, making my actions look even more dark by contrast!
Why would you say that? Either you're the most ignorant old man I've ever met or you were born an idiot. The fact that Camillo ran away, on top of Hermione and Polixenes' disgusting hook-ups (even if we didn't see them, we have all the evidence except the visual proof), on top of everything else, makes putting Hermione on trial absolutely necessary. It would be wrong to go about something this serious haphazardly, so I've sent my servants Cleomenes and Dion (you know them; they're good guys) to Delphos, to Apollo's temple. They'll bring back a prophecy from the oracle that will settle everything, for good or bad. How did I do?
Oh, that joke is made of leather so thin it has been stretched from an inch wide to a full fat yard.
Do it, knight. I'll write a letter challenging him on your behalf. Or I'll tell him your insults myself.
In the next half an hour hell be asleep. Will you kill him then?
[Coming up with an idea] But what if...
If you are Prospero, tell us the details of how you survived, and how you met us here when just three hours ago we were shipwrecked and I lost my dear son Ferdinand. How sharp the pain of this memory is!
Lead me on.
A curse, a curse  on all tired, worthless horses, on all crazy masters, and on all bad roads! Was ever a man beaten so much as me? Was ever a man so weary? I've been sent ahead to make a fire, and they're coming afterward to warm themselves up. It's a good thing I can keep myself hot with my quick temper, or else my lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, and my heart to my belly before I could find a fire to thaw myself out. But I'll keep stoking my anger to stay warm. In weather like this, a better man than I am would catch cold.Hey, hello! Curtis!
How cruel! He would have died in battle if he did not have certain good qualities. And even though his sword-arm has bought him a longer life, in which he owes nothing to anyone, take this as encouragement to change your ruling. Think of what's mine as his, and because I know you all love money, I'll give to you all that I have won at war in return for his safety. If he owes his life for this crime, let it at least be had at war with the army. War can punish the way the law does.
This is the time that Madam Silvia told me to come and talk to her. There's something she wants me to do. [To SILVIA] Madam, madam!
So he rode on Barbary? Tell me, kind friend, how did the horse take to him?
These banished men that I have lived with have some valuable qualities. Forgive them for what they have done here, and let them return home from their exile. They are reformed, civil, full of goodness, and ready to do you great service, noble Lord.
What are you studying, teacher? First answer me that.
No, you were provoked by your own bloody mind, which never thinks about anything but butchery. Did you kill this king?
Yes, sir, and I'm afraid we've arrived at a bad time. The skies look dark, which means it's about to storm. In my opinion, the gods are angry at us and are punishing us.
[As LUCENTIO] And I am a man that loves Bianca more than words can express, or your thoughts can guess.
So does everyone here. How much money did he ask you for?
Yes, she did.
I'll sell all my land.
I would build a little cabin outside your gates, and from there I'd call out to you, my soul, in your house. I would write loyal songs about unrequited love and sing them loudly even in the dead of night. I would shout your name to the hills and make their echoes cry out "Olivia!" Oh, you wouldn't be able to go anywhere under the sun without pitying me.
"I may command the one I love." Well, she may command me. I am her servant, and she is my lady. This much is easy for anyone to figure out. There's no difficulty here. But the endwhat do those letters mean? If only I could make them refer to mewait! M.O.A.I.
What will you do now? If you dare to try my patience further, then draw your sword.
[To himself] You are happy now, but I'll ruin your happiness, no matter how honest you may think I am.
My lord, your son was gone before I came.
Will you let yourself be crowned tomorrow?
Yes, if you dare do something that would help yourself. Cassio is having dinner tonight with a prostitute, and I am going to go meet him there. He doesn't know yet about his good luck with this promotion. If you will be on the lookout for him there (and I'll make it so he is walking by between twelve and one o'clock) you can get him. I'll be nearby to help you, and he'll be surrounded by us. Come on, don't stand there dumbfounded. Go along with me. I will prove to you that you absolutely must kill Cassio, and you will realize you have no choice but to do it. It is now almost dinner time, and time is wasting. Go do it!
A distance whose every inch seems to scream, How can Claribel ever follow us back to Naples? Stay in Tunis, and let Sebastian get his good fortune." Imagine that instead of these men sleeping here, they were dead. Well, they'd be just as badly off as they are now. There are many who can rule Naples just as well as this man who's sleeping. And there are lots of lords who can babble as much as Gonzalo. I could teach a crow to blabber such nonsense. Oh, I wish your thoughts were the same as minethen you'd see how these sleeping men are an unparalleled opportunity for you. Do you understand what I'm saying?
Ha! What gift has he sent me? I owe that man so much, since he's always giving me gifts. How do you think I should thank him? What has he sent me?
[Reading] "To my beloved, who doesn't know of my love, I send this letter and my good wishes"And it's phrased just how she would speak! Excuse me for breaking your seal, wax. But wait! This wax is stamped with an image of Lucrece, which Olivia uses for her seal. This letter is from my lady. But who is it written to?
I don't know him, but I've heard of him: a merchant of incomparable wealth.
You too-fond crazy woman, will you hide this dark plot? A dozen of them have sworn on God to kill the king at Oxford.
To be clear: you're a liar. You're a coward who shrinks away from honesty and who's afraid to do the right thing. You're either a servant who won my trust only so you could betray me, or an idiot who sees what's going on and, for his own gain, pretends it's all a joke.
Good morning, neighbor Baptista.
Come here, servant, come. Im ready now. Approach, my Ariel, come.
[As LUCENTIO] That's a trivial objection: he is old, and I am young.
Romeo! Cousin Romeo! Romeo!
The first thing you should know is that his mother is the empress.
I was called Marina because I was born at sea.
We've never had such a shortage of creatures. We only have three, and they can only do what they can do. And they've worked so much they're as good as rotten.
May only good things happen to you from now on! He deserved to die, and your Graces did well in making an example of him and discouraging other false traitors from attempting similar plots. I never expected anything better from him once he got involved with Mrs. Shore.
Why thank you! How is your whore girlfriend?
Welcome, my lords. I know you follow a banished traitor: I can only give you thanks now, but soon you'll be rewarded for your efforts on my behalf.
My lord?
The man who dies pays the ultimate debt. I defy you, devil! God bless us.
I have a daughter, too. I'll love yours like my own.
Your answers are too shallow and too lively.
Please send her in.
I say silver sound, because musicians play music to earn silver.
If there are devils, I wish I were one, and could live and burn forever in fireso that I could see you in hell, and continue to torment you with my bitter words!
It is! You lie! You lie! I say you lie, Camillo, and I hate you. You're a disgusting lowlife, a mindless slave, or maybe just a two-faced liar who can pay lip-service to good while really doing evil. If my wife's liver were as diseased as her whole life is, she'd drop dead in an instant.
For as long as her fair life lasts.
Come and swear that's true, damn yourself by making a false oath. Otherwise, since you look so angelic, the devils themselves would be afraid to seize you. So doubly damn yourself by swearing falsely that you are honest!
Long live Helicanus!
I'm from Tyre. My name is Pericles. I've been schooled in arts and in arms. I was looking for adventure in the world when I was shipwrecked by storms, lost my men, and landed on your shore.
Madam, I'll sing.
[To TRINCULO] Oh, do I? Take that, then. [He hits TRINCULO] There's more where that came from if you say that I'm a liar again.
If she would do the dirty, you mean.
As many good mornings to yourself, worthy lady. According to your ladyship's command, I was supposed to come this early to find out what service you'd like me to carry out.
The handkerchief!
Well, it's up to you.
You accuse me unjustly.
I figured that out when I guessed you were in love.
What a pitiful sight! The count lies here, dead. And Juliet is bleeding. Her body is still warm even though she has been dead and buried for the last two days. Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets. Wake up the Montagues. Have some others search.
Yes.
But the unbelievable thing isand this is really almost hard to imagine
I couldnt send it. Here it is. [He gives FRIAR LAWRENCE a letter] And I couldn't even get a messenger to bring it to you because they were scared of getting infected.
Just "madam," and nothing else. That's what lords call their ladies.
You mean his vices, right? There's no virtue that would get you kicked out of court. They could use virtue there, considering they have none.
His sorrow and grief make him sound unhingedbut he's here.
That's my job.
Ha!
In a way, these debts are a blessing in disguise, because this way I can see who my real friends are. You'll see how wrong you are about their loyalty to meI have many friends! Come here Flaminius, Servilius!
If I haven't stolen this role from myself, then I am.
God knows I see you sick; my vision may not be so good anymore, but I see you are ill. Your deathbed is no less than your land, where you lie with a disease of bad reputation; and you, too careless patient that you are, put your body in the hands of the doctors who first hurt you. A thousand flatters sit within your crown, which is no larger than your head: and yet despite its small size, there is a sickness there that might encompass the whole country. Oh, had your grandfather been able to see the future, seeing how his grandson would destroy his own sons, he would have taken the crown out of your grasp, deposing you before you had itand now, you are about to depose yourself. Why, cousin,  if you were king of the world it would be a shame to rent out this land; but since you're only king of this country, it's even more shameful to treat it as you do. You're just the landlord of England, not king: you rule as a slave to the law, not by your own right; and you
[To MIRANDA] Lift the tasseled curtains of your eyelids, and tell me what you see over there.
Ha, that poor woman!
I was directed here by men who tell me you have gone crazy and insult them.
[Singing in his own voice]Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,Tell me how your lady is.
And let them die that are old and bad-tempered! For you are both, and both are appropriate for the grave.
A million goodbyes.
Look behind you, my lord.
[To the PAINTER] You must dine with me. Don't go until I have thanked you for your painting, and when dinner is over show me your latest work. I will be happy to see you.
Flow this way! What a fine man! He keeps time well. Those wishes of health will make you and your state sorry, Timon. [Referring to himself] Here before you stands a man not like the wine you toast with, but like honest water, which is too weak a drink to be a sinner and never abandoned a man in times of need. This food for thought is equal to the food you offer, no doubt. Men who attend feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.[APERMANTUS gives his own toast] Immortal gods, I do not want money; I pray for no one other than myself. Please grant that I never become so dumb as to trust a man on his oath or promise; or a whore, when she weeps; or a dog, that seems to sleep; or a jailer with my freedom; or my friends if I ever need them. Amen. So let's get to eating: rich men will sin while I eat my root.
I agree with this plan. If we can find the right man, I'd give him the best horse in Padua to start wooing Katherine immediately, marry her, take her to bed, and rid the house of her! Come on.
Come, Sir Andrew. To be still awake after midnight is to be up early in the morning, and you surely know that waking up at dawn is supposed to be healthy
Here stands Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, both to defend himself and to prove Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby, disloyal to God, his sovereign and to him, and if not to prove himself a false liar: courageously and eagerly, he waits for the signal to begin.
Pourquoi, my dear knight?
[To PETRUCHIO] You're being too blunt. Go about it with more ceremony.
You'll know about that later.
Go, Cleomenes. You and some of these gentleman should welcome them on my behalf. Still, it's strange for Florizel to surprise us like this.
If things go well, bring the citizens to my estate at Baynard's Castle. There you'll find me accompanied by priests and bishops.
Monster, I smell like horse piss, and my nose is not at all happy about it.
Nurse, wheres my daughter? Tell her to come here.
Your husband, sweet lady.
If it really was that handkerchief
He jokes about scars from wounds hes never felt.But wait! What light is that in the window over there? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. Rise, beautiful sun, and kill the jealous moon, which is already sick and pale with grief because Juliet, her maid, is more beautiful than she is. Dont be her maid, since shes jealous. The moons virginity makes her look sick and green, and only fools hold on to their virginity. Throw it off. It is my lady. Oh, it is my love. Oh, I wish she knew I loved her. Shes talking, but isnt saying anything. Why is that? Her eyes are speaking. Ill respondno, I am too bold. Its not to me she speaks. Two of the most beautiful stars in the sky had to go off on some business, and begged her eyes to twinkle in their place until they return. If her eyes were in the sky and the stars were in her head the brightness of her cheeks would overwhelm the stars, just as daylight outshines a lamp. And her eyes in the night sky would shine so brightly that birds would start singing, thinking it was day. Look how she leans her cheek against her hand. I wish I were a glove on that hand, so I could touch her cheek.
Oh terrible day!
Calm yourself, gentle nephew. Leave him be. He holds himself like a gentleman of good manners, and, to be honest, everyone in Verona says that he is a virtuous and well-behaved youth. Not for all the wealth in this town would I insult him in my own house. Be calm. Pretend you never saw him. That is my command, and if you respect me, youll stop with all these frowns, which is no way to behave at a party.
Where could his gold be? It is the last scrap of his life of wealth. It was the mere desire for gold and the betrayal of his friends which drove him to this depression.
We were like two lambs that frolicked in the sunshine and bleated to each other; we were completely innocent and knew nothing about evil. We couldn't even comprehend evil. If we'd stayed like that, and we'd never had to grow up, we could have gone to heaven and honestly told God that we'd never sinned.
Say no more. Whatever's happened, you overstepped your boundaries in making that speech.
Oh, gentle Aaron, we're all ruined! Help, or we'll be miserable forever!
No one but Hermione herself deserves that role. Besides, the gods intended this: didn't Apollo's oracle say that King Leontes would not have an heir until his lost child was found? It's about as likely that baby will return as it is that Antigonus, my husband (who died with it) will come back to life. You're advising the king to go against the gods' will.[To LEONTES] Don't worry about having children; you'll find someone to inherit the throne. Alexander the Great didn't have children, so he left his to whoever was most worthy. That worked out fine for him.
May God preserve your good luck, your Honor!
They're abusing me, and I won't endure it! Who has been complaining to the king that I am harsh and don't like them? By Saint Paul, whoever is worrying the king with these treacherous rumors doesn't love him very much. Just because I cannot flatter and look handsome, smile in men's faces, ingratiate myself, lie and cheat, and bow like a pretentious Frenchman, people assume that I'm a foul enemy. Can't a plain man live, wishing no harm on anyone, without his words being twisted like this by slick, sly, slithering lowlifes?
Here I go, here I go.
Oh, heaven have mercy on me!
The ripest fruit falls first, and so does he; his time is over, so we must carry on his absence. So much for that. Now for our Irish wars: we must defeat these rough woolly-headed rebels, which spread like poison, and since we need money to fund these great affairs, we will take all of Gaunt's property, jewels, and income.
Which of us are you referring to, your Grace?
Are you not a philosopher?
My dear Othello!
It will be seven o'clock before I'll get on any horse. Whatever I say, or do, or think, you are still contradicting it. Sirs, never mind. I won't go today. I won't go until it is the time that I say it is.
Heaven forbid!
I hope you will.
What do you have to report, Aemilius?
Indeed, I must die, which is why I came here. Good and noble young man, dont tempt a desperate man. Run from here and leave me alone. Think about the dead who rest here. Let them terrify you. I beg you, young man, dont make me so angry that I have to add another sin to those I already have committed. Oh, get out of here! I swear by God, I love you more than I love myself. For Ive come here with weapons to use against myself. Dont stay here, go away. Live, and afterwards say that a merciful madman told you to run away.
Do or don't, damn you.
Shame on you then for having failed to do so.
So as soon as we're done with dinner you will be leaving, Alcibiades. [To CAPHIS] What? You're here to see me?
[To TRINCULO] No you are lying, you joking monkey, you! I wish my brave master would kill you. I did not lie.
Name your enemies, Timon, we'd like to know.
Hey, Timon!
No, she didn't. I have brought him back here again.
Enough. You've reached the limit of your lives.
We are not animals, birds, nor fish. We cannot live on just grass, berries, and water.
Oh, I have read that. It's not a holy message, it's heresy. Do you have anything more to say?
I'm not weary, and night is a long way away. Please, let's go satisfy our eyes with the sight of the memorials and statues that make this city famous.
What do you mean, "gone?"
Thank you, my lord.
You think Im like that?
I know the man a little. Go, call him here, boy.
[Whispering] Now the bird approaches the snare.
Oh, right, monster, we know what sort of clothes are nothing more than second-hand rags. And these are good quality. [He puts on a gown] Oh, King Stephano!
Thats because the traitorous murderer still lives.
Let him be the devil if he wants to be, I don't care. God will give me the faith to resist him. It doesn't matter to me.
Speak then, but I won't listen.
OId John of Gaunt, well-respected Lancaster : have you, according to your promise and duty, brought here your presumptuous son Henry Hereford to explain his case against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, which at the time we didn't have time to hear?
Ah, yes. Where is my conscience? If a conscience were a blister on my heel, I'd put my slippers on. But I don't feel this "conscience" in my chest. Even if there were twenty guilty consciences standing between me and the dukedom of Milan, I'd combine them like candies and melt them away before they'd bother me. Here lies your sleeping brother, who'd be of no more value than the ground he's lying on if he were in fact what he now looks likedead, that is. And I, with just three inches of this sword, could put him to rest forever; while you, doing the same, could give ancient Gonzalo a permanent sleep to ensure that he wouldn't stand against us. As for everyone else, they'll accept whatever we say just as easily as a cat accepts milk. They'll chime in agreement when we instruct them to, just like a clock telling time.
God, I wish I'd never seen it!
And I swear it too.
Wait, daughter. I see a ray of hope. But it will require an act as desperate as the situation we want to avoid. If you have the willpower to kill yourself rather than marry Count Paris, then youll likely agree to experience something like death to escape this problem. You can wrestle with death itself in order to escape from death. If you dare to do it, Ill give you the solution.
I don't know where he sleeps, so for me to say that he sleeps somewhere would be lying.
Listen, where is our master? Are we done for? Fired? Is there nothing left?
Well, look where you are now! The only thing to do is to tell the king she's a changeling and not your biological daughter.
[To an attendant] Meet me in a minute at the harbor.[To RODERIGO] Come here. If you are bravefor after all, they say that lousy men acquire more nobility than they naturally have when they are in lovelisten to me. Tonight, the lieutenant Cassio will be on guard. First of all, I have to tell you this: Desdemona is in love with him.
Ah, Temperanceshe was quite an alluring girl.
And so we will, as long as he wins Katherine.
No, this is the kind of thing we like! Come on, let in this group of men.
I think it was him.
God of the sea, please stop this horrible storm, which washes over both heaven and hell. You can control the wind; settle them down, since you're the one who called them up. Stop the deafening, terrifying thunder and halt the quick, bright lightning! Oh, Lychorida, how is the queen doing? This storm is absolutely crazy! From what the sailors are saying, we're due to die any minute now. Lychoridaoh, Lucina, goddess of midwives and childbirth, come aboard our boat and make my wife's labor go quickly!
And I'll bet she has a trick or two up her sleeve.
Please, your highness, give us more credit than that. We've always served you faithfully. We're begging you on our knees: in recognition of our past and future service to you, listen to us and stop what you're doing right now. It's too horrible, too bloodyand it's going to end badly. Watch us kneel. [All the gentlemen kneel to LEONTES]
I wish you were what I want you to be!
Even if she were uglier than she is, she'd have to be screwed.
Greetings, king! May the gods protect you. Greetings, sir!
My lords, I bring greetings from Andronicus with all the humility I can. [To himself] And I pray the Roman gods punish you both!
[As VINCENTIO] Quiet, son.Sir, if I mayhaving come to Padua to collect some debts, my son Lucentio made me aware of the deep love between your daughter and himself. Because of the good reports I've heard about you, and for the sake of the love between your daughter and my son, I won't delayI am glad to have him matched. And if you also approve of the marriage, then you'll find me ready and willing to consent to your daughter's betrothal. I won't be fussy about details with you, Sir Baptista, for I respect you.
She doesn't like it when you talk about violence.
I hope that all men live in hope.
Mamillius, go play. That's a good boy. [MAMILLIUS leaves]Camillo, this all-important man has decided to stay longer.
The king has ordered that the queen appear at court in person. Silence!
Who was it that you were chasing after with your sword? What did he do to you?
Why are you looking at me like that? I'm sorry this happened, but I'm not afraid. This delays me, but doesn't change me. I am who I was before. This setback makes me want to marry Perdita even more.
Well, some do, some don't. But, mistress, since it's me that bought her
Monster, losing those bottles of wine was a loss much worse than disgrace or dishonor.
How but well, sir? How but well? It would be impossible to go any other way.
Oh, my!
If I were king? I would rather be a peddler. Far be it for me to ever think of being king.
The king tried to make peace among all of us, and I hope he succeeded. For me, at least, those vows of friendship were firm and true.
Come, come! I know it's best for you. Walk half an hour, Leonine, at least. Remember what I said.
The house will be a calmer place for it.
It's news that grieves me to report, my lord.
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter, husband?
Since she's not actually part of your family, your family hasn't offended the king, and your family can't be punished by him. Show him the things you found with herall the things that you kept secret all these years (except for whatever she took with her). Then, the law can have nothing to do with us, I promise you.
Fool, I say!
My mother was the daughter of a king, and she died as soon as I was born. My nurse, Lychorida, told me the story many times, crying.
Come, Kate, come. Don't look so sour.
Now go. Good night. And remember that everything depends on you being out of Verona before the night watch takes its position, or that you disguise yourself and leave after daybreak. Stay a while in Mantua. Ill find your servant, and every once in a while Ill send you news through him about every good thing that occurs for you here. Give me your hand. Its late. Farewell. Good night.
May God keep you safe here! I'm afraid of the consequences; you've been sheltered enough to not know what fear is. I'm terrified of what would happen if your dad showed up here by chance the way that you did. Oh, just imagine! What would he think of his royal son being engaged to someone like me? What would he say? And how would I, in this ridiculous outfit, respond to his anger?
It is true, and because you do not have a dog which I could imitate so as to flatter you, I hope you catch a disease!
Good uncle, take this barbaric Moor as your prisonerhe's a hungry tiger, a cursed devil. Dont feed him, but keep him in chains until hes brought before the empress, to prove what shes done. And make sure our army is close by; Im afraid the emperor plans to betray us.
Is it possible?
Tell me, are these wind instruments?
[Singing]Your father lies thirty feet below the sea,His bones are made of coral now.His eyes have turned to pearls.Every part of him that is impermanent,Has changed completely in the seaTo become something rich and strange.Sea nymphs ring his death bell hourly.
Antonio, oh my dear Antonio! How time has tortured me ever since I lost you!
Oh, he has a son. He'll be skinned alive, drizzled in honey, thrown into a wasp's nest, and forced to stay there until he's nearly dead. Then they'll wake him up with a shot of whisky and stand him, raw flesh and all, on top of a brick wall to be baked in the sun and eaten by flies. But why are we talking about these backstabbing traitors? We should be thankful they're going to be put to death for their crimes! Since you seem to be humble peasants, tell me what you're bringing to the king. If it's worth his attention, I'll bring you aboard his ship and introduce you to him with a kind recommendation. If there's anyone besides the king who can help you, it's me.
Here comes my noble fool-catcher.
Who is it who calls so coldly?
[As LUCENTIO] Maybe I mean the father and the daughter, sir. What is it to you?
Toad!
And meet me at the Elephant.
Weren't you banished on pain of death?
Well, sir, since you know I've served your father well, it follows that I would serve just as well the person he loves the most (that is, you). Hear me out: if you encounter any difficulties on your journey, I can tell you where to go, where to take Perdita (since it's clear you don't want to be separated from her, unless some sort of catastrophe got in your way), and where to marry her. And, while you're gone, I can try to win your father over for you.
Are you okay, Malvolio?
It's so strange how all of them suddenly got so tired!
"And some have greatness thrust upon them."
Amen.
To be honest, they deserve to keep their heads more than the people who've accused them deserve to keep their duke's caps. But come, my lord, let's go.
You've said enough.[To DUKE OF AUMERLE] I hate you, cousin, for leading me out of that sweet way to despair! What do you have to say now? What comfort do we have now? By heaven, I'll hate him forever that tells me to "be of comfort" anymore. I'll go to Flint castle: there I'll waste away; a king, sorrow's slave, shall obey his sorrow. The men that I have, let them go, to plow the earth that still has some hope to give, for I have none. Let no men try to argue with me, for advice is no use.
And I was on my way to yours, Cassio. Why have you been away for a week? Seven days and nights? One hundred and sixty-eight hours? And hours that lovers spend apart pass eight times more slowly than normal. How tiresome to count the hours going by!
Then say that you'll accept me.
No, we'll talk to him first.
I know both of them. The other one is a jeweler.
I don't know her, but I know her father, and he knew my father well when he was alive. I won't sleep until I see her, Hortensio, so I hope you'll pardon me for cutting off this first meeting of oursunless you want to come with me.
Take him away! Who has caused all this trouble?
Paulina, you keep Hermione's memory alive. I wish I would have listened to you before! If I had, I might be looking into my queen's eyes at this very moment. I might be kissing her precious lips
Do you think he really means it? Look at his face; he's not crying, his prayers are false; his words come from his mouth, but ours from our hearts. He begs weakly and would rather that you not grant his request; we pray with heart and soul and everything else. His tired joints would rather rise, I know; our knees will kneel to the ground until they take root there. His prayers are full of false hypocrisy; ours are full of true emotion and deep honesty. Our prayers out-pray hisso let us have the mercy which true prayer should receive.
And you as well.
It's an honor that I dont think about at all.
Sir, I swear that I did hear a strange humming sound, which woke me up. I shook you, sir, and cried out. When I opened my eyes, I saw their raised swords. There was a noise, thats true. It would be best if we either set a constant guard here, or left this place entirely. Lets take out our own swords too.
I guarantee you that my man is as trustworthy as steel.
Please, Camillo, don't pester me. Though it's hard to deny you anything, it would be the death of you if I said "yes."
Not money, I swear. But Ill insult you, and call you rogues.
Most excellent accomplished lady, may the heavens rain odors upon you!
No, definitely tonight, look how fresh she looks! They shouldn't have thrown her in the sea. Build a fire inside, and bring all the boxes from my closet.
I have no choice in the matter. Farewell.
I will tell her, sir, that you protest to her, which I think is a gentlemanly offer.
How dare plants grow up toward the sky, from which they receive rain and sun?
Hit him on the head with the hilt of your sword, and then throw him in the wine barrel in the next room.
Honestly, honestly, that saying certainly didn't hold true for Richard! He was a terrible child, and took such a long time to grow up that if that rule were true, he should be a very gracious adult.
Do you want me to come with you?
A widow never suffered so great a loss.
Farewell then. Remain in the darkness. I won't declare you sane until you agree with Pythagoras, and fear to kill a pigeon because it might have the soul of your grandmother. Farewell.
I wish poison would go wherever my mind sent it!
I have been to a place where I learned to repent for the sin of being disobedient to my father and his commands. I am instructed by holy Friar Lawrence to kneel down and beg your forgiveness. [She kneels] Forgive me, I beg you. From now on Ill do what you tell me to.
Ladies, there is a small banquet here for you. Please enjoy yourselves.
See where his Grace is standingbetween two clergymen.
[To himself] Come on, wit, give me something good to say now! Those people who think they're witty often prove to be fools. And I'm sure that I'm not witty, so I might pass for a wise man. For what did the philosopher Quinapalus say? "Better a witty fool, than a foolish wit."
Are you Sebastian, then?
Sir, I'll use all the skills I have to help him, as long as no one but me and my maid are allowed to come near him.
Please tell me, clever York, who told you this about him?
The best part was the blast of the oracle's ear-defeaning voice; it was like thunder! I was scared senseless. I felt tiny and insignificant.
Ha ha ha! He thinks so? He's a very nice guy, but he has spent too much money. I came over several times for dinner and told him to be more thrifty, but he would never listen or heed my warnings. No one is perfect, and his vice is generosity. I told him so, but never could change his ways.
I'll swear to that.
I wish my spit were deadly poison.
The curse my noble father laid on you when you set a paper crown on his head, and drew rivers of tears from his eyes with your scorn, and then, to dry them, you gave him a handkerchief soaked in innocent Rutland's bloodthe curses he laid on you then, when his bitter soul condemned you, have now come to pass. God, not us, is punishing you for your bloody deeds.
My lord, if you'll take into consideration what you've just seen and heard, I hope that you'll accept me as a sister-in-law instead of a wife. We can have the two weddings on the same day, if you want, here at my house, and I'll pay for everything.
I am already hunting a hart, but it's also my heart being hunted. Oh, when I first saw Olivia, it seemed to me that she purified the air with her very presence. In that instant I was transformed into a hart, and ever since then my desire for her has pursued me like a pack of cruel hunting hounds.
Tear me apart and take me away, and may the gods take their revenge upon you!
She was here just now. She follows me everywhere. The other day I was talking along the shore with some Venetians, and the silly girl came to me andI swearshe hangs around my neck like this
The mayor is on his way and nearly here. Pretend to be afraid, and don't let yourself be spoken to until we plead with you. And get a prayer book in your hand and stand between two priests, my good lord. I'll use that to improvise an argument for your holiness. But don't be easily won over by our requests to be king. Be like a coy virgin: refuse for a long time, and then finally accept.
Dear boy, believe me. Anyone who says that you're a man is denying you the happy years of your youth. Your lips are as smooth and ruby-red as the goddess Diana's. Your small voice is like a girl's, high and clear, and the rest of you is feminine as well. I know you have been predestined to do this job. [To CURIO and attendants] Four or five of you go with him. All of you can go if you want to, for I feel my best when I'm away from people. [To VIOLA] If you succeed in this you will live as well as I do, and share in all my fortune.
May God end this foolish fantasy in your Honor's mind! Alas, that a mighty man of such noble birth, with so much wealth and such a good reputation, should be infected with such a terrible illness!
If we find you in Athens two days from now, you will face the most severe punishment. And even though it displeases us, your friend will be executed now.
Oh, the widow Dido? Of course, the widow Dido.
Hold on, everyoneboth those supporting me, and the rest of you. If this were the time to fight, I'd know it without anyone telling me. So where do you want me to go to answer this accusation of yours?
Oh, forgive me sir. I have made a mistake. This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
[As LUCENTIO] And if I am, sir, is it a problem?
[To ARIEL so that only he can hear] Magnificently done, my hard-working spirit. Youll get your freedom.
[To himself] As much as an apple looks like an oyster, but that's no matter.
That may be true, since my face is not my own.
Agreed.
Oh, you malicious wretch! Cassio, how did you come across my wife's handkerchief?
My hair stands on end when I hear her curses.
What is the matter?
I do trust you, but what if Antiochus attacks while I'm gone?
You poor thing! In that case, you need clothes to be buried in, not for what's left of your clothes to be taken away.
Oh come on. You decided she was beautiful when no one else was around and there was no one to compare her to except herself. But if instead you compare her to some other beautiful woman who Ill point out to you at this feast, youll see that shes far from the best.
[To TITUS] Why, sir, this is the perfect messenger for your speech. Let him take the pigeons to the emperor from you.
Yes, leave, and take these notes of the debt with you, and make sure to show him that the time has already passed to pay me back.
I don't know, mighty king. I can only guess.
He has wounded me a little, I confess. But since the taunt grazed me and kept flying, it's ten to one that it hit you two straight on.
Its torture, not mercy. Heaven is in Verona because this is where Juliet lives. Every cat and dog and little mouse, every unworthy creature, that lives in Verona lives in heaven because it can see her. But I wont be able to. Carrion-eating flies will have more vitality, a more blessed existence, and more romance than I will. They can touch Juliets white hand and can steal kisses from her sweet lips, whichthough she is a pure virginblush when they touch each other because they think its a sin. But Romeo cant touch her hand or kiss her. Flies can kiss her, but I must fly from the city. Flies are free, but Ive been banished. Do you still argue that exile isnt death? You didnt have some poison, a sharpened knife, or some other weapon that you could have used to kill me quickly, nothing so disgraceful, other than banishment? Oh Friar, damned souls use the word banishment to describe hell. They howl the word. How, as a priest, confessor, and my friend, can you have the heart to say to me the word banished?
Which makes it even worse that I escaped Leonine's hands, where I might have died.
I do.
Only your name is my enemy. Youd be yourself even if you ceased to be a Montague. Whats a Montague, after all? Its not a hand, foot, arm, face, or any other body part. Oh, change your name! Whats the significance of a name? The thing we call a rose would smell as sweet even if we called it by some other name. So even if Romeo had some other name, he would still be perfect. Romeo, take off your namewhich really has no connection to who you areand take all of me instead.
[To himself] Well, then, it's time to wake him up from his trance.
What do you want with her? Pretend that I'm her.
The fifth knight's shield shows a hand emerging from clouds, holding pure gold. His motto is, "Faith should be valued this way."
Yes, my lord, that's him. How are you, Malvolio?
And then to have an expression of great authority, and to gravely survey the room and then tell them that I know my place, and I'd like them to know theirs. I'd ask for my cousin Toby
"Think, my lord?" Come on, you're repeating everything I say like a strange monster in your mind that you're afraid is to hideous to show. You're hinting at something. You just said earlier that you didn't like how Cassio left my wife's side. What about it didn't you like? And when I told you that Cassio advised me the whole time I was courting Desdemona, you said, "Oh really?" And you raised your eyebrows like you had some secret thought about it. If you care about me at all, tell me what you're thinking.
She said so. I must tell the truth.
No. When he wakes up he'll say that we killed him like cowards.
That's a lie! You're rough and hairy. Don't lie to me. Only business people lie. But, since we soldiers pay them with money instead of pulling out our swords, they don't expose us for lying.
Iago, naked in bed and not meaning any harm? That would be like tricking the devil. If they were acting this way but had virtuous intentions, they were tempted by the devil and they were tempting God to damn them.
Boult!
That can't be true!
Come closer to me Flaminius. Your lord is a generous man, but you are smart and know as well as anybody, even though you've come to me, that now is not the time to lend money, especially to friends, without some kind of insurance. Here are three coins. This way you can say that you never visited me and I did not reject your request for a loan. Goodbye.
I thank you, my good lord, and thank you all. But I thought my mother and my brother York would have met us on our way long before now. And it's shameful what a slug Hastings is, that he hasn't even come to tell us whether or not they're coming!
Lets make sure the law is on our side by getting them to start the fight.
[To LEONTES] Sir, you had a lot to grieve for, but sixteen years should have helped ease that pain. Few joys last that long, and any other sorrow would have fizzled out long before now.
Hello, my friend Cassio!
Welcome to you!How's it going to you?Hey to you!My friend to you!And that's enough greetings. Now, my dapper companions, is everything neat and ready?
[To himself] Well, I guess I won't be hanged now (though I almost was). He's gone, but the king should be happy anyway, since Pericles will probably die at sea. I'll come out of hiding.[To HELICANUS and the LORDS] Greetings, lords of Tyre!
What report would you like me to bring Athens for you?
This man is very honest and knows human interactions very well. If I find proof that Desdemona is unfaithful, I'll let her go like I'm getting rid of a pet, even if the leash is my own heartstrings. Maybe since I am black and don't have the smooth conversational skills of gallant men, or maybe since I'm getting oldbut no, none of that's important. She's gone, I am betrayed, and my only recourse must be to hate her. Oh, this is the curse of marriage, that we can have control over our delicate wives, but not their desires. I'd rather be a toad who survives off the mold in a dungeon than to share the thing I love with others. But that's what you get for being a powerful man, as this happens more often to noblemen than to commoners. It's an inescapable part of fate, like death. From the moment we're born we are fated to wear the horns. Look, here she comes.
Shut your mouth, girl. I think I'll have to do something about you. You're young and naive and you'll have to be broken as I would have you.
Don't go see your bride in these disrespectful clothes. Go to my room and put on some of my clothes.
We're near Tarsus.
I swear by the holy mother of our Lordthe citizens didn't say a word.
Who am I, sir! No, who are you, sir? By the immortal gods! Oh, you complete villain! A silken jacket, velvet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a tall hat! Oh, I'm ruined, I'm ruined! While I played the thrifty father at home, my son and my servant have spent all my money at university.
May God, in his next shipment of hair, send you a beard!
How would you go about wooing her?
Come on, come on. Youre an impertinent boy. Is that really how you think it is? This silliness is likely to come back to harm you. I know what Im doing, but you feel the need to contradict me. Well, Ill show you a thing or two.
How does that work?
[To VIOLA] I must ask you for some of that money.
We're simple people, sir.
Come on, in God's name, let's continue on to your father's house. Good Lord, the moon is so bright and beautiful tonight!
Yes, and for that I thank God, my father, and yourself.
[Offstage] My lord, my lord! What is going on? My lord, my lord!
Yes, and he'll tame her.
This is my niece's chambermaid.
I want to speak with Clarence, and I came here on my legs.
I can't say the name, or I'll offend you.
May honor, riches, marriage, blessings, Long life, and ever increasing, Constant joy be always with you. Juno sings her blessings to you.
Lady, you don't know the rules of charity, which transforms evil into good, and curses into blessings.
Spoken like a good worker! Here's to you, boy!
Why are you saying this to me? I never hurt you. You drew your sword against me without a good reason, but I spoke politely to you and didn't hurt you.
[To LANCE] What's this? You bastard peasant! Where have you been these past two days?
Hello?
I am their father's mother. I will see them.
Not Romeo, Prince. He was Mercutios friend. His crime was justice, because it took the life of Tybalt.
So, this is Tyre, and this is the court. I'm supposed to kill King Pericles here and, if I don't do it, I'll be hanged back home. It's dangerous. Well, now I see that a man would be wise if, being told to ask for whatever he wanted from the king, said he didn't want to know any of the king's secrets. Now I see his reason for it: I mean, if a king tells you to be a villain, you're bound by your promise to him to be one. Quiet! Here come the lords of Tyre.
Did you say "die"? May the gods forbid! I have a coat here, come on, put it on, get warm. Now come with me, handsome man! You can come home with me. We'll have meat on holidays, fish on fasting days, and plenty of desserts and pancakes, and you're welcome to it all.
I will, sir.
I'm done. Yet, if you do intend to marry, sir, and won't be stopped, give me the right to choose your new queen. She won't be as young as your first one, but she'll be someone that Hermione's ghost would be happy to see you with.
All of us kneeled down in front of you and begged you not to do this, and the beautiful girl herself was forced to choose whether to follow her own disgust at the marriage or her duty to obey you. Now weve lost your son forever too, I fear. This marriage and subsequent shipwreck has created more widows in Milan and Naples than we have survivors to bring home to comfort them. All of this is your fault.
And I'm proud of the fact that I was never a wasteful man like you.
Though he'd be the king of this land with no kingship.
Listen to a little more, and Ill tell you everything up to our current situation, which is the entire reason why its necessary for me to tell you this story at all.
Can't we see her, sir?
To be a peacemaker is a fitting role for me, at my age: my son, throw down the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
I recognize that voice! You're, you'reoh, Pericles!
Oh Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead! His noble spirit has gone to heaven, but it was too early for him to leave this life.
Fair enough.
Such a worthy man, this lord.
Sir, I'll answer for anything I've done. But, I beg you. if you're okay with the fact that your fair daughter, at this late hour of the night, is handed over  to the gross hands of a lustful Moor with no guard but a common servant for hire, a gondolier evenif you know all this, and you allow it (which I think is the case), well then I admit we have insolently done you wrong. But if you're not aware of all this, then my own good manners suggest that you're wrong to scold us. Don't think that I would just play around with such a serious matter, contrary to any good manners. I repeat: if you haven't given your daughter permission, then she has seriously rebelled against your authority. She's giving all her obedience, beauty, wit, and wealth to some extravagant, wandering foreigner, who seems to have roots just about everywhere. Go now and see for yourself. If she's in her room, or even in your house, sue me and let the government punish me for lying to you like this.
I hope the gods give them what they deserve! But calm down, those old cronies have ingratitude in their DNA. Their blood is thick and runs slow and cold. They do not have the warmth to be kind. And they must act as their nature dictates, dull and heavy.
I think so too.
[To GROOM] If you love me, it's time for you to go.
Queen Mab? Whos she?
So you won't admit it?
What is it you want, Timon?
And here he comes.
Why, man?
Let me stay at your own risk, Timon. I come only to observe and am giving you fair warning abo that.
[As LUCENTIO] I have no love for scolders, sir. Biondello, let's go.
Did you see the gloomy Lord Northumberland?
Oh, you deserve: they deserve who know the strongest and best way to get what they want. [To York]  Uncle, give me your hands: no, dry your eyes; tears show their love, but won't fix anything. [To Bolingbroke] Cousin, I am too young to be your father, though you are old enough to be my heir. What you want, I'll give you willingly, for we must do what force compels us to do. We'll go to London, cousin, isn't that so?
Well, should I stab him as he sleeps?
You cant talk about something you dont feel. If you were as young as I am, in love with Juliet, married to her for just an hour, and had murdered Tybalt...If you loved her as I do and were banished as I am, then you could talk about it. Though instead you might tear out your hair and fall to the ground the way I do right now [He falls on the ground] in order to measure out your grave.
Quiet, you mumbling fool! Save your wisdom for your gossiping buddies. We dont need it here.
I have to deflower you; otherwise you'll have to be killed. Come with me. We can't have any more gentleman driven away. Come with me, I said!
He called me Sebastian. I have seen my brother when I look in my mirror. My brother looked like me, and now I'm dressed as he used to dress, in the same fashion, colors, and with the same accessoriesbecause I imitated him in my disguise. Oh, if it's true, then storms are kind and the ocean is full of love!
Sir, listen to some more of the poem. All of those men who were his equals, some of an even better rank, immediately follow him, so that his rooms are suddenly filled with attendants who shower his ears with whispers of their sacrificial devotion to him, and make sacred even his mounting of a horse, as if it were only because of him that they could breathe.
Spirit, we must prepare to deal with Caliban.
Your mother was good and honest, and she said you were my daughter. And your father was Duke of Milan, and you were his heir, a princess of the same noble birth as her parents.
Come on, missy, come with me.
Yes, yes! Pains flare up and wither your tender joints! That there can be so much disdain amongst these villains, who act with such politeness! All this politeness! The human species has bred itself into baboons and monkeys.
When I say your name. I'll beat you up, if only touching you wouldn't infect my hands!
Not me, believe me. Youve got on dancing shoes with nimble soles. But my soul is made of lead so heavy that it anchors me to the ground and I cant move.
Do you hear, my honest friend?
Whos bothering me? Are you trying to make me open the door, so that Ill lose my resolve and all my work will come to nothing? Youre wrong if you think that will happenfor Ive written my plan on this paper in blood, and what is written will be done.
Take care of that boy.
I think our clothes are as fresh now as they were when we put them on in Africa to attend the marriage of the kings beautiful daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
Good day, gentlewoman! I beg you to take me where I can speak with Madam Silvia.
Oh monstrous arrogance! You lie, you thread, you thimble, you puny measurement! You flea, you louse egg, you winter cricket! Defied in my own house by a spool of thread? Away with you, you rag, you fragment, you remnant, or I'll use your own yardstick against you until you think twice about talking again for the rest of your life! I tell you that you've ruined her gown.
No, not a bit. I find you exceedingly gentle. I was told that you were rough, scornful, and sullen, but now I see that those rumors are lies. You are pleasant, amusing, polite, not sharp-tongued, and as sweet as springtime flowers. Even if you tried, you couldn't frown, glare scornfully, or bite your lip as angry women do, and you take no pleasure in arguments. Instead you entertain your suitors with mild and gentle conversation, and are quiet and friendly. So why does the world report that Kate limps along? What a slanderous world! Kate is like a hazel-twig, straight and slender, her hair is as brown as hazelnuts, and she herself is sweeter than the hazelnut kernels. Oh, let me see you walk, Kate! You don't limp at all!
I would bet my life on her honesty! Honest Iago, I must leave Desdemona with you. Please, have your wife look after her, and bring them along after me when you get the chance. Come with me, Desdemona. I have only an hour to spend with you in love, and to teach you some worldly things. We can't be late.
I gave him no order. I gave him the material.
[So only GRUMIO can hear] Quiet, boy.
[To FABIAN and MARIA] Come on, come on! Quiet, quiet. We must be gentle with him. Let me deal with this. [To MALVOLIO] How are you, Malvolio? How are you feeling? Come on, man, renounce the devil! Remember, he's the enemy of mankind.
What are you doing, Aaron? Why did you do this?
Let the devil and his wife follow you around! Why did you give me that handkerchief just recently? I was an idiot to accept it. You want me to copy the embroidery? What a likely story, that you found it in your room and didn't know who left it there! This is a gift from some woman, and you want me to copy out the embroidery? There, give it back to your new mistress. Wherever you got it from, I'm not copying any of it.
If you are her, then I ask you to patiently hear the message I am sent here to deliver.
Curse those men shouting below decks! Theyre louder than the storm and distracting us from our duties.
I have Clarence's son locked up, and Clarence's daughter married off to a poor fellow. Edward's sons are sleeping in heaven, and my wife Anne has bid this world goodnight. But I know that Richmond aims to marry young Elizabethmy brother Edward's daughterand win the crown through that match. So now I go to her: a jolly, lively wooer.
But did your sister die of her love, my boy?
As long as I'm alive.
Sir, don't worry. As you know, I have a lot of connections there. I can make sure you're provided for, as surely as if I were there myself. For example, sirif I can ease your mind, talk with me for a moment.
How are you, my husband? I have been talking here with a man who, sadly, you are displeased with.
Most noble sir, do you recognize my voice?
I am glad to see you.
They're busy inside. You'd better knock louder.
He is.
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] What, are you threatening me that you'll tell the king? Go ahead and tell him, and don't spare any details. Look, I will repeat what I have said here in the presence of the king. I'll even risk being sent to the Tower for it. It seems that all my efforts on Edward's behalf have been forgotten.
No, I'll have nothing from you. Besides, if I were bribed like all the others, there wouldn't be anyone left to criticize you, and then you would fall even faster than you do now. You give so much I worry that you will yourself away In IOUs shortly: why do you have these feasts, celebrations, and vanities?
I beg your pardon, your Graces. His Majesty the king has strictly ordered that no one can speak privately with your brother Clarence, no matter their social rank.
Our great master!
Call up my brotheroh, if only you had married her! [To members of the search party] Some of you go one way, some go another way. [To RODERIGO] Do you know where we might find her and the Moor?
Here comes a messenger.
[To PROSPERO so that only he can hear] Was the job well done?
I beg your pardon. Here's some money to cure that blow I gave you. [He gives money] Has any quick-thinking friend of mine offered a reward to whoever brings that traitor in?
May God and our own innocence defend us!
Go then and get your men, but leave behind your son, George Stanley. Make sure your loyalty stays firm, or else he has a good chance of losing his head.
The wind that scatters young men throughout the world to seek their fortunes away from home, where there are few new experiences to be had. But to be brief, Sir Hortensio, this is how it stands: Antonio, my father, is dead, and I have now thrown myself into the wide world to try and marry and thrive as best I can. I have money in my purse and property at home, so I've set off to see the world.
The king and the prince are praying. Lets pray with them, since we share their situation.
Do it! Shout as loud and as seriously as when someone cries "Fire!" in a crowded city at night.
You did, it seems, since you told them to "countenance" her.
Anything. Call me an honorable murderer, if you wish, since I didn't do anything out of hate but instead out of a sense of honor.
But you, who are dying, say that you flatter me.
Please leave these burial ceremonies for me to finish, as I have more reason to mourn than you do. Go immediately to my estate at Crosby House. After I have solemnly buried this noble king at Chertsey Abbey, and wet his grave with my repentant tears, I will hurry to meet you there. Please do this for me, I beg you. My reasons must remain secret for now.
You're a smart man. Let us eat and drink then. Maria, I say! Bring us a big mug of wine!
Wherever seems best for your royal self. If I can advise you, though, you should stay a day or two in the Tower. After that you can stay wherever you like, and wherever seems best for your health and pleasure.
You're waging war on Athens?
Farewell, old lady. Farewell, lady, lady, lady.
A boy?
Yes, my lord.
Good Peter, to hide her face, please give her the fan. Her fan is prettier than her face.
We know each other's faces. But as for our hearts, he doesn't know mine any more than I know yours or his, or you know mine.
Oh, that wretched villain!
Are you begging, Brother?
He has. But see, here he comes with the mayor.
Ratcliffe, come here. Ride quickly to Salisbury. When you get there
Yes, sir.
Ma'am, he hasn't slept tonight, and he demanded that no one be allowed into his room.
My lord, we have always said the same.
His name is Doricles. He says he owns a prosperous farm, and I believe it, considering how handsome and well-dressed he is. He says he's in love with my daughter, and I think it's true. To be blunt, the way he stares at her completely gives it away! You'd be hard pressed to say which one loves the other more.
Sir, there are secrets in this bag and this box which are for the king alone. If I get the chance to speak to him, he'll know within the hour.
Let her be hanged! I'm just calling her what she is now. Such a skilled sewer, such an admirable musician. Oh, she could sing so well she'd charm a savage bear to gentleness! She's so clever and intelligent!
Petruchio, should I speak plainly then and offer you a shrewish, unpleasant wife? I don't think you'd thank me for my suggestion, but I promise you she's rich, yes, very rich. But you are my friend, so I won't wish her on you.
Yes, if you approve.
The man is going mad. Take him away. Come on, come on, sir.
[To himself] Short summers often have an early spring, as they say. Those who die young are usually precocious.
Oh Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I ever had! Oh, well-mannered, honorable Tybalt! If only I had not lived long enough to see him die.
I have made your bed with the sheets from your wedding night, as you asked.
I'll do it, and return soon.
What? Alcibiades is banished?
[To CAPULET] Shame on you! What, are you crazy?
He's coming, madam, but in a very strange manner. He seems crazy, madam.
At least let me know where you're headed to.
What support did we have besides Clarence? And he's dead.
No. I'll never set foot in a place like this again, if she's not there.
Here, improve your feast.
Heaven knows the truth: that you are false as hell.
How could we do anything else in your royal presence?
[To herself] The one man I love is the son of the one man I hate! I saw him before I knew who he was, and learned who he was too late! What a monster love is to make me love my worst enemy.
I'll follow this good priest, and go with you; and once I've sworn to be faithful, I'll be faithful forever.
All right, break it up. Thanks, gentleman, and everyone. You all did well. [To PERICLES] But you were the best.[To ALL] Servants, bring lamps and take these knights to their rooms![To PERICLES] We've asked for you to have the best room, right next to mine.
I can't tell. Those who teach young children do it in a gentle way with easy tasks. He should have scolded me in this kind of a gentle way, for I am truly like a child who has been scolded.
Roderigo from Venice?
Madam?
[To himself] I wish I didnt know the reason why it should be slowed down.
We have one here, sir, if she would . . . but we've never had anyone like her in Mytilene.
If you know this place is a brothel, why did you come in? I've heard that you're honorable, and that you're the governor of this place.
[As LUCENTIO] Yes, but your goods were just gathering dust and annoying you. Now they'll either bring you a profit or be lost at sea.
Well, let it strike ten then.
Ventidius just held his father's funeral, who died and left him heir to an enormous fortune. When he was poor and had no one to turn to, I gave him five talents. Go to him for me and ask that his friend needs him right now, and hopes that he remembers those five talents.
He'll have to do better than this to prove himself. His rusty armor looks less like a knight's and more like it came from a junk shop.
You speak of the famous Alcibiades?
I will be mild and gentle in my words.
If they had actually gotten married and you were his brother-in-law by now, he'd hate you even more, and the price on your head would be even higher.
Unfortunately, yes.
Calm down, please! It was an accident.
What is this supposed to mean?
Are you so impatient? God knows I waited for you, in torment and in agony, when I was giving birth to you.
[To SEBASTIAN so that only he can hear] Im very glad hes lost all hope. Dont give up on the plan we agreed to carry out just because we failed in our first attempt.
Crossed laces?
I swear it is, or else I'm a villain.
I go.
You worthless, worthless man! I am sick of this lying world and will not love anything but the most basic necessities. So, Timon, prepare your own grave, lie down here where the light foam of the sea might lap against your grave stone every single day. Make your own epitaph, so my death will laugh at the lives of others.
But how long will that "ever" last?
Oh, she teaches the torches to burn bright! She glows in the darkness like a jewel in the ear of an African. Her beauty is too good to be used and worn, too precious for this world. Like a white dove in a flock of crows, she surpasses all the other women. When this dance ends, Ill note where she stands, and then Ill touch her hand and thereby bless my ugly one. Did I ever love anyone before this moment? Renounce that love, my eyes! I never saw true beauty until this night.
What's the news from outside the country?
It's not a good idea for me, certainly. Wait, sir, here's my purse. [Giving SEBASTIAN some money] The best place to stay is an inn called the Elephant. It's in the suburbs to the south. I'll order our meals while you spend your time pleasantly and educate yourself by exploring the town. You can find me back at the Elephant.
Are the knights ready to begin the contest?
[To SIR TOBY BELCH] Oh my, the demon speaks so loudly from within him. Didn't I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady asks you to take care of him.
He's a devil, a devil from the moment he was born. His nature can never be changed, no matter how much care he receives. All my work for himall done with sincere care for himhad no effect, absolutely no effect. As he grows older, his body grows uglier, and his mind becomes more evil. Ill put them all in agony until they roar in pain.
Your forehead looks wrinkled with thought. Are you upset, my love?
Please, be quiet.
I'll stab the tadpole with the point of my blade; nurse, give it to me. My sword will soon get rid of it.
Never, except once.
Go, take it away and let your master use it however he wants.
The man with the two pretty daughtersis that who you mean?
What do you want us to do?
I ask for your forgiveness. This here is Cassio, hurt by some villains.
To your plates.
Have courage, man. The injury cant be so bad.
What kind of man is he?
I'll deliver the message as well as I can.
Madam.
Get her out of here!
I hit hard, when Im motivated.
Goodness gracious! There's my little chickadee. Is that some dirt on your nose? They say it looks just like mine. Come on, buddy, we should be part of the same herd. Did you know that a bull, a cow, and a calf are called a herd? [Looking toward POLIXENES and HERMIONE] Still holding his hand! [To MAMILLIUS] Well, my silly little calf. Are you my calf?
Why do you spit at me?
Ill be calm when the sea is. Get out of here! These waves dont care that someone here is a king. Get to your cabins and be quiet! Stop bothering us.
Didn't I tell you how I was tricked and lost all my money?
What are you going to tell her, Nurse? Youre not understanding me.
[To DESDEMONA] I kissed you before I killed you. Now that I am killing myself, I must die with a kiss.
Look, look! Oh, what an awful day!
I'll take every flower Mother Earth has to offer, to decorate your grave with yellows, blues, purple violets, marigoldsall these will cover you as long as summer lasts. Poor me! When I was born (in a storm), my mother died; my whole life has been a continuous storm blowing me away from my friends.
What can I swear? You don't believe in any gods; if that's true, then how can you believe an oath?
Sir, he may still live. I saw him swim over the waves and ride upon their backs. He treaded water, withstanding all their rage, and fought through even the biggest waves that came at him. He bravely kept his head above the rough waves. And with his powerful arms and strong strokes he swam toward the shore, which seemed almost to lean forward to help him from the water. I have no doubt that he got to the shore alive.
What did that nun say? Is she dead? Help her, gentlemen!
Alas, he was a good gentleman! And alas, poor Cassio!
And I wouldn't want to stay at my father's house, either, as my presence would irritate him. Most gracious Duke, listen to my proposal, and please voice your support for my simple idea.
To me he's one in a million.
At least tell him we are waiting for him.
Believe me, sister, out of all the men alive I've never yet seen that special face that I could love more than any other.
It doesn't appear that way.
Bad news, by the Virgin Mary. The news is always bad, and likely to get worse. I fear that the world will go crazy.
You sad-looking men, people, and sons of Rometorn apart by conflict, scattered like a flock of birds in the windwe'll show you how to put this broken body back together again, how to put the scattered corn back into its sheaf. If we don't, Rome will be a curse to herself. The empire that once defeated many mighty kingdoms will, like a pitiful and desperate person shipwrecked on an island, collapse. But if white hair and wrinkles (the signs of experience) can't convince you to listen to me[To LUCIUS] then speak, Rome's good friend. Speak as eloquently as Aeneas when he told lovesick Dido about the fall of Troythat destructive, burning night when the Greeks surprised King Priam's city. Tell us what Sinon has betrayed us, or who brought in the Trojan horse that has caused civil war in Rome. My heart isn't made of flint or steel, and I can't talk about all our suffering without cryingso I'll have to stop talking, even when you should listen most closely to what I have to say. Here's your captain: let him explain everything. Your hearts will throb and cry when you hear him.
Tunis has never before had such a perfect beauty for a queen.
Petruchio, since the conversation has gone this far already, I'll continue with what I meant only as a joke. I can help you find a wife, Petruchio, who's rich, young, beautiful, and brought up as a noble gentlewoman. Her only flaw, and it's certainly a big one, is that she is an unbearable shrew, disagreeable and willful, and so much so that even if I was broke I wouldn't marry her for a goldmine.
[To MIRANDA, who is about to speak] Quiet for now, darling. Juno and Ceres are whispering about something serious. Theres something else they must do. Be quiet and don't speak, or else my spell will be broken.
[To PERDITA] I'll have your beautiful face scratched with thorns until you're uglier than your ugly poverty. [To FLORIZEL] And you, lover boy, if you so much as sigh over not seeing this slut again, you'll never inherit the throne and, what's more, I'll disown you as my son. You'll be out of the family forever, mark my words. Follow me back to court.[To the SHEPHERD] This time you're off the hook, though I am not at all pleased. [To PERDITA] And you, you witch! Your tricks might be good enough for a shepherd, but not for my son. If you ever let him through your gates again, or lay a hand on him, I'll think up the cruelest, most painful possible death for you.
Dear Apollo, help it all go well! I don't like these accusations against Hermione one bit.
If I were as quick to get into fights as you are, my life insurance rates would be immense.
A dollar.
You go, Malvolio. If this visitor is a messenger from the duke, then tell him that I'm sick, or not at home. Do whatever you have to to make him go away.
Her brothers died because of that same "safety."
Hello, sir! Why are you shaking? Don't be afraid; no one's going to hurt you.
Just some dry humor, sir.
Since you won't listen to my advice, you'll have to face the consequences: if you read the riddle and can't answer it, you'll be killed like the others before you.
If he says anything against me, Ill teach him a lesson, even if he were tougher than he isand twenty wise-asses like him. And if I couldnt take him down myself, Ill find someone who can. That rotten scoundrel! Im not one of his flirty girls. Im not one of his low-life scheming friends.
I wouldn't have missed this entertainment for a pension of thousands, to be paid by the Shah of Persia.
Are you going to weep forever about your cousins death? Do you think you can wash him out of his grave with tears? Even if you could, you couldnt bring him back to life. So stop crying. Some grief shows a lot of love. But too much grief makes you look silly.
Easily, my good lady.
It's all mortgaged, and some of it already sold. What's left won't even come close to paying off everyone. And what are we going to do about the even greater number of creditors that will approach us soon? What can we do in the long run?
I can't sleep. I'm pale and sick. I can't stop thinking about it, can't stop trying to come up with ways to stop this storm before it happens. And since there's no solution, I'm just letting myself be sad about it.
Bring me my boots; I'm going to the king.
Is Clarence dead? The death sentence had been reversed.
If I can get him to have just one drink, together with what he's already had to drink, he'll be as belligerent and testy as a badly trained as a young girl's pet dog. Now my fool Roderigowhom love has practically turned inside out, has drunk whole pots full of wine in toasts to Desdemonaand he's on guard duty. I've gotten three men from Cyprus drunk as well, noble men who are worried about maintaining their honor (which is important in this warlike island), and they are also on guard duty. Now among this flock of drunkards, I will put Cassio, and I'll have him do something to offend the men of Cyprus. But here they come. If things turn out as I want them to, I've got smooth sailing ahead.
We say Amen to that! We will be witnesses.
Hmph!
Everyone else leave. But take care to see what ships are coming in and out of the harbor and report back to me.[The LORDS leave]Helicanus, you've got my attention. How do I look?
Ah, well done, the chair! Some good man carry him away carefully. I'll go get the general's doctor. [To BIANCA] As for you, mistress, don't bother trying to help. Cassio, the man who lies murdered here was my dear friend. What bad blood was there between the two of you?
Yes, by stabbing them in their hearts, grandfather.
With all my heart. I remember this fellow herehe once played the part of a farmer's eldest son. That was the play in which you courted the gentlewoman so successfully. I've forgotten your name, but you were well suited for that role, and played it realistically.
Continue, continue, or Ill proclaim victory.
My brother-in-law of Gloucester, you're mistaken. It was the king himself, unprovoked by anyone, who noticed your hatred for my children, my brothers, and myselfan inner hatred that expresses itself in your outward actions. He summoned people to ask them about your dislike of us, so that he might discover the reasons behind it and do something about it.
Some people in the street are crying Romeo. Others cry Juliet, and still others Paris. Theyre all running and screaming towards our tomb.
He would not say that.
If you so much as touch the princess in response to his disgusting words, your hands will be cursed forever.
May Mercurythat god of deceptionmake you a skilled liar, to reward you for speaking so highly of fools!
Are the English really so good at drinking?
That handkerchief that I loved so much and gave to you, you gave to Cassio.
Oh, Sir, things are what they are. What a man can't get, he can trade for (like his wife's soul).
Don't you hear a cry?
Good day, brother. Why do you have all these armed guards accompanying you, your Grace?
May you live in misery and love it too.
The king is here: be gentle to this youth, since young horses only get angrier when shouted at.
I am very sorry, sir, for all the wrong I've done you, sir. Please report good things about me to the prince my master.
Please, heaven, stop your wrath! Wind, rain and thunder: remember that earthly men can only yield to you and recognize that I, as an earthly man, do obey you. The sea has tossed me onto the rocks, washed me from shore to shore, and left me sure of nothing but that my end is near. Please, let it be enough for your great powers that I, a prince, have lost everything. Since you've thrown me out of your watery grave, all I ask is to die here in peace.
He was just here, and he is certainly strangely bothered.
Look at all the people following the lord!
I'm a virgin, sir, and though I've never asked for anyone's attention, I've had a lot of people stare at me (as though I were a shooting star)! I'm speaking to you, sir, because I think I may have experienced grief that, if we compared, might equal yours. Though I've been unlucky to end up where I am now, I'm descended from ancestors who were the equivalent of powerful kings. I've been robbed of my inheritance from my parents, and over the course of time have been forced to serve the world and its uncomfortable institutions. [To herself] I should stop. But there's something that warms my cheek, a little voice inside me telling me, "Keep going until he says something."
Listen, Escanes: Antiochus was committing incest, and the most high gods couldn't contain their vengeance any longer against this most horrible of crimes. He was at the height of his glory, riding in his expensive chariot with his daughter when lightening struck from heaven, shriveling up their bodies to a disgusting, stinking mess. It was so horrible that no one who formerly adored them would stoop low enough to bury them.
Magni Dominator poli, Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?
She has been more beautiful than she is now, madam. When she thought that my master loved her, I think she was as beautiful as you. But since she stopped looking in the mirror and threw her mask away, the air has starved the rosy blush on her cheeks, and eroded the lily-white color of her face, so now she has become as black as I.
No.
Whatever he gives courteously, I accept gratefully.
Well, now you missed the target. She wont be hit by Cupids arrow. Shes like Diana, protected by the armor of chastity. She is immune to the weak and childish arrows of love. She ignores words of love, refuses to even let you look at her with loving eyes, or open her lap to receive golden gifts that would even tempt a saint. Oh, shes rich in beauty. But shes also poor, because when she dies her beauty will die along with her.
Hail, royal prince!
Im no lord of yours, you haughty insulting man, nor no mans lord; I have no name, no titleno, not even the name that was given to me when I was baptizedthat isnt usurped. How can I have lived so many winters and dont know now what name to call myself? Oh, that I were a mockery, a king of snow, that would melt away in water-drops, standing before the sun of Bolingbroke! [To Bolingbroke] Good king, great kingand yet not greatly goodif my word still counts for something in England, ask that someone bring a mirror here, so that I can see what I look like now that Im no longer king.
Yes, but why?
Open it, and read it.
Otherwise, would they be happy to die?
The tyrannous and bloody act is done. It was the worst, most horrible massacre of which this land has ever been guilty. Dighton and Forrestwhom I hired to do this piece of ruthless butcheryare experienced villains. They are like bloody hunting dogs. But even they melted with tenderness and compassion, and wept like children when they told the sad story of what they'd done. "The gentle children lay like this," Dighton said. "Like this," said Forrest, "embracing each other with their white innocent arms. Their lips were touching, like four red roses on a stalk. And a prayer book lay on their pillow," said Forrest, "which almost made me change my mind. But oh, the devil" And there the villain stopped talking, and Dighton continued the tale: "We smothered the most perfect, sweet work that nature ever created." Both men were crushed with remorse, so that they couldn't speak any more. I left them both to bring this news to the bloody king.
So now the Yorks' prosperity has ripened and rotted, falling into the mouth of death. I've been lurking in the shadows here to watch my enemies come to ruin, and it's a terrible scene I've witnessedan ominous prologue to what I hope will be a bitter, dark, and tragic conclusion. I'll head to France. But hide now, wretched Margaret. Who's coming?
[To himself] Joking makes their work fun!
When I'm at home I spend all my time playing, laughing, and working with him. He's my friend and my enemy, my shadow, my soldier, my little king-in-training. He makes the days fly by and his crazy antics keep me from taking myself too seriously.
Yes, because I am young and haven't experienced any sorrow.
My heart will show what I can't tell you with words.
Silver. Follow them, Silver!
Yes, Timon.
We should kill him before he harasses us.
Master, I'm thinking of the poor men that were shipwrecked before us even now.
Oh, why would nature create such a foul place, unless the gods take delight in our suffering?
I know it's the sun that shines so bright.
Yes, but the citizens prefer Lucius, and will rebel against me to support him.
You can rely on me, your Ladyship. Have a good morning, gentle lady.
[To ALONSO] In the name of all that is holy, sir, why do you stand there staring strangely around?
It may be so; and yet my inward soul tells me it's not. For whatever reason, I can't help but be sad: so extremely sad that, even if I'm not thinking of anything in particular, I feel exhausted and frightened by this heavy nothing weighing on me.
Well, then on Judgment Day he'll say that we stabbed him in his sleep.
Oh, but they're our friends. Just one drink. I'll even drink it for you.
My lady, I humbly thank you.
May the god of melancholy watch over you, and may a tailor make you a jacket of opal, for your mind changes like the colors of an opal. Men as changeable as you should be put out to sea, where they can make everything their business and scatter their ideas everywhere, drifting about on the changeable wavesthat's how you make a good voyage out of nothing. Farewell.
And in saying so, you'll only be telling the truth.
[Reading] "Jack of Norfolk, don't be too bold, for Dick your master's been bought and sold." Some plot of the enemy's. Go, gentlemen, every man to his position. Don't let our babbling dreams frighten our souls. "Conscience" is just a word that cowards use to keep down the strong. Our strength will make us right; our swords will be the law. March on. Meet the enemy bravely. Let's go down fightingif not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.
Dance with Mopsa . . . though you might need some strong stuff to cover her bad breath!
[To SIR TOBY BELCH] Let me go.
Knock on the door? Oh God! Didn't you clearly say the words "Man, knock me here, pound here, and knock me well?" And now you're claiming it was "knocking on the door?"
[Opening the door] Welcome, then.
[To ANTONIO] We'll continue this later.
I think I do.
Oh no, the storm is returning! The best thing for me would be to crawl under his cloak. Theres no other shelter nearby. When times are tough, youll end up close to the strangest people. Ill cover myself up here until the last of the storm passes. [He crawls under the cloak]
And is worth more than our labor to find you.
Is that all you saw? Didn't you notice how her sister began to scold and cause such a ruckus that human ears could hardly endure the noise?
Like the moon, which falls as it loses its light to give. But I cannot renew myself and start again like the moon. There are no suns out there to borrow light from.
The castle is royally defended against your entrance, my lord.
What are you talking to me about with "robbing?"  This is the city of Venice. My house isn't some unprotected barn.
I thank you, gentle Percy; and be sure that I count myself lucky for nothing so much as my good friends. And as my fortune improves with your love, I'll reward you well: my heart promises this, and a handshake seals it.
You want a single word with one of us? Combine it with something else. Make it a word and a punch.
Go, fellow, go. Return to your lord. Tell him not to worry about the two separate meetings. He and I will be at one meeting, and my good friend Catesby will be at the other. Nothing important can happen at the secret meeting without us hearing about it. Tell your lord that his fears are shadows without evidence. And as for his dreams, I'm surprised that he's so foolish as to trust the imaginings of restless sleep. To flee the boar before he even pursues us would make the boar angry, and incite him to chase us even if he never intended to in the first place. Go tell your master to get up and meet me, and we'll go together to the Tower. There he'll see that the boar will treat us kindly.
Who's blocking my path?
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know that I have many servants who might eavesdrop, and "little pitchers have big ears," as they say. Besides, old Gremio is always hanging around and listening, so we might be interrupted.
Good morning to you both. What do you mean I tricked you?
What is your idea, Desdemona?
I don't want your food. It would choke me because it is offered to flatterers, and I would never flatter you. Oh you gods, what number of men eat Timon's meat, and he doesn't even notice. It makes me sad to see so many dip their meat into the blood of one man, and the crazy thing about it all is that he encourages them to do it! I wonder how men dare to trust other men. They should be cautious of letting them bring their knives to such a feast. It would keep them from eating so much, and probably save their lives too! There are many examples of it: the man sitting next to him now, breaks bread with him, and shares his germs as he drinks from the same glassthat is the man most ready to kill him. It is certain. If I were a man of higher rank, I would fear drinking at my meals, because they might be able to see my neck's tenderest spots while I tilted my head back. Great men should drink with armor on their throats.
Well, that's comforting. [Enter CAMILLO] Hey, Camillo, is that you?
Treason! Foul treason! Villain! Traitor! Slave!
[As LUCENTIO] That "only" came just in time.
Brabantio, wake up! Thieves! Thieves! Check on your house, check on your daughter, check on your money bags! Thieves! Thieves!
Now you see, sir, how your jokes grow stale, and people dislike them.
What's going on, woman? How dare you!Bianca, step away from her.The poor girl, she's weeping! [To BIANCA] Go do some sewing, and don't talk to her.[To KATHERINE] For shame, you vicious creature, you devil! Why would you hurt her when she's never done you any harm? When did she ever speak a single cruel word to you?
Why are you dressed like that, Andronicus?
I'll leave you for a while, dear. Mind you, walk slowly and don't get too worked up! What? I have to take care of you!
Help, help, help!
Is he here?
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke. Tell him that I, the mayor, and some citizens have come to confer with his Grace about matters of great importance, which concern the good of all.
You are banished from Verona. Be patient, the world is big and anything can happen.
I don't beg to stand; I only ask for pardon.
Please, that's enough of your jokes. Here's a little gold for you.  If the woman who takes care of the general's wife is awake, tell her that a man named Cassio begs the she give him a chance to speak with her. Will you do this?
Here, at your lordship's service.
Get out of here; I have to goSomewhere you can't follow.
He's still only in the second degree, my lady, so the fool will take care of the madman.
The devil may take me if I should ever do such a wrong for the whole world.
Enough, you owls! All I hear are songs of death. [He strikes the THIRD MESSENGER] There, take that until you bring me better news.
It doesn't matter, since they left their food behind, and we have hungry stomachs. Would you like to taste some of the food?
Indeed, I do mean to keep myself warm, sweet Katherine, in your bed. But enough chatter. Let's speak plainly: your father has consented that you will be my wife. Your dowry is agreed upon, and whether you want it or not, I will marry you. Now, Kate, I'm the only husband for you. I swear by this light, which lets me see your beautyyour beauty that makes me love youthat you must be married to no man but me. I was born to tame you, Kate, and change you from a wildcat Kate into a Kate as obedient as other domesticated Kates.
Neither, girl: for happy stories remind me of my sorrow, and sad stories add more sorrow to my already sad life. I already know I'm sad, and there's no point in complaining about my lack of happiness.
You speak honestly. Have a nice day.
If I were like you I'd throw myself away.
My message can't be told to anyone, my lady. It's only for your own willing and receptive ears.
Come here, son; come, come, and show us how to cry. Your grandfather loved you very much. He would often bounce you on his knee, or sing to you until you fell asleep on his chest; he told you many things that were fit for you to know when you were a child. Like a loving child, then, shed some tears, since kind nature requires it. Friends should be together in times of grief and sorrow. Say goodbye before we bury him. Do that kindness, and then leave him in peace.
Come here, little man. Will you play with me?
Verona in the summertime has no flower as fine as him.
But how? How will you be satisfied, my lord? Would you, like a voyeur, inappropriately watch and look on as she is having sex?
A rhyme I learned just now from somebody I danced with.
Go to your chairs as hungrily as you might kiss the lips of your mistress. There are no assigned seats, when the food gets cold before people find out where they sit. Sit, sit, and thank the gods. I thank you for the gifts you have given, and hope you will keep enough for yourselves so that you can still be so charitable in the future. You should have given enough that no man will have to give his own money to another, because even gods would not be successful in applying for a loan nowadays. Enjoy the meat more than you enjoy the man who provides you with it. Make sure also that twenty out of twenty men are villains, as you might let twelve women at a table be as they are. As for the rest, the senators and the commoners, destroy the worst parts of them.[Gesturing to the people around him]  My friends here, they mean nothing to me, so bless them with nothing. Here they are welcome to nothing. Uncover the dishes so the dogs may lick up the water.
Am I only three inches? Why, your cuckold's horn is a foot long, and I'm at least that tall. But are you going to make a fire, or will I have to complain about you to our mistress? Now that she's at hand, you'll soon feel her hand, and you'll find it cold comfort if you're slow in warming us up.
So we hear you're the governor? Don't be so surprised by all our ships and men. We've heard about your suffering all the way in Tyre, and we've seen the destruction in your streets. We came to help, not to make things worse. These ships might look like the Trojan horse (which had Greek soldiers hidden inside, bloodthirsty and ready to attack), but they're filled with grain to make bread, to bring all your starving people back to life.
[To the PAGE] Lead on, boy. Which way?
See, no one has private access to Pericles except for Helicanus.
Yes, but the mustard's a little too hot.
You silly madman, listen to me for a second.
Now knock when I tell you to, you idiot peasant.
Praise Diana! I'm doing what you asked: I'll tell the whole story here. I'm the king of Tyre. I left my country because I was afraid for my life, and married Thaisa in Pentapolis. She died giving birth to our daughter, Marina, at sea. Marina is still a virgin like you, Diana! Cleon took care of her in Tarsus, but when she was fourteen years old he tried to murder her. Luckily, she came to Mytilene, where, when I arrived, by good fortune she was brought aboard my ship and, by recounting her story, she made it clear she was my daughter.
Oh, Pomfret, Pomfret! Oh, you bloody prison, fatal to noblemen! King Richard II was hacked to death within your guilty walls. And nowto bring greater shame to your ominous namewe must offer up our innocent lives here.
I approve so wholeheartedly that I'd like to have the wedding immediately and get you off to bed!
[Singing] On the twelfth day of December
It's no surprise that it frightened you, my lord. I'm afraid just hearing you tell it.
A curse on these wild, pompous fellows who are always spouting exotic foreign phrases. These fellows, who say things like: By Jesus, this is a very good blade! A very brave man! A very good whore. Isnt it a sad thing, good man, that we are forced to interact with these foreign flies, these fashionmongers, these fellows who say pardon me and care so deeply about good manners that they cant relax on a bench without groaning, Oh, my aching bones!
Im crying at my cowardice for not daring to give you what I want to give you, much less take what Im dying to have. But that's nothing. And the more I try to hide my feelings, the larger they get. So stop being so shy and indirect, Miranda, and let your innocent directness guide you! Ill be your wife if you will marry me. If you won't, Ill die a virgin, having never loved another man. You can refuse to make me your wife, but Ill be your servant whether you want me to or not.
Here you've seen a king commit incest with his daughter. Pericles will turn out to be a much more powerful prince and a better ruler, strong in both word and deed. But now he has to keep his mouth shut, until enough time has passed. I'll show you how much trouble he had to deal with; once he got over the molehill, he ran into a mountain. That good man whom I bless, Pericles, is still at Tarsus, where everyone is singing his praises and the city is erecting a statue of him to remember him byeverything seems happy. But what you're about to see contradicts that, so what can I say?
My mistress is my mistress; this child is me, the picture of how I was a child. I prefer this to all the world, and despite everything I will keep it safeor all Rome will burn.
Can I ask you to stay?
Greetings, sir! May the gods bless you!
By God's eyelid, I'll go after him again and fight him.
Oh, help, hey! Bring some light! I need a doctor!
If Mamillius had lived to see this day, he'd be Florizel's age. They were born about a month apart.
Haha, you've confessed it? And been hanged for the sin, have you not?
Him? I recognize him.
How's it going, my golden one?
Look, here comes the smallest bird of all.
Wasn't that Cassio who was just talking to my wife?
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls, and that the unjust people who do this to us will suffer in hell.
Will you really deny that you know me now? Is it possible that all I've done for you can't persuade you to help me? Don't make my misery even worse, or make me so angry that I list out all the kind things I've done for you.
Every day new taxes are invented, such as blanks, benevolences, and I know not what: but what, in God's name, will come of this?
Go on, now. Bye. Now are you listening to me?
[To FERDINAND] Who is this young woman with whom you were playing chess? You cant have known her for more than three hours. Is she the goddess that separated us and then brought us back together?
Yes, a thousand times. Peter!
If just one of the pockets on his clothes could speak, wouldnt it say that hes a liar?
Sir, I beg you: don't trouble yourself any further.
I give it out of sincere kindness and affection for you.
You lie, you evil thing! Have you forgotten the awful witch Sycorax, who was so old and filled with anger that she was so stooped over? Have you forgotten her?
And wasn't that lucky! Please, don't finish your story. Next you're going to say that your queen and I are devils. Actually, keep goingwe'll admit to being the cause of your sin as long as you admit you sinned with us for the first time and swear you haven't sinned with anyone else since.
I'll buy that.
No, in its tongue.
Your face is mine, and you have slandered it.
The Duke and Senators of Venice send their greetings.
A daughter? Oh God, I wish that they were both living in Naples, as king and queen of the country! To make that happen, Id sacrifice my own life and lie in the muddy bed beneath the ocean. When did you lose your daughter?
Honestly, when I ran into this holy man, I did think of those men you mention. So, are you going to the Tower?
What? Just now?
Give my regards to Lord Hastings. Tell him, Catesby, that the dangerous enemies who have plagued him for years will be executed tomorrow at Pomfret Castle. And to celebrate this good news, tell him to give Miss Shore an extra kiss.
Stop that. You're drunk.
Go, girl. I can't blame you for weeping now. Such an insult would offend even a saint, let alone an impatient shrew like you.
What did he say?
To horse, to horse! Encourage those who are afraid.
We cant be both here and there at once! Be cheerful, boys. Be quick for a while, and may the longest lived take everything.
A rogue is going to tell me what to do? I'll beat the scoundrel to a pulp.
Good aunt, stand up.
I tell you, Kate, it was burnt and dried up. I'm expressly forbidden from eating meat like that, for it creates choler and makes me angry. It's probably better that we should go hungry, since we're both hotheaded and temperamental, than that we should eat such overcooked meat. Be patientit'll get fixed tomorrow. For tonight we'll just go without food. Come, I'll bring you to your bridal bedroom.
Very proudly, as if he had contempt for the ground beneath his feet.
No, gentlemen, dont leave now. We have a bit of dessert arriving any moment. [They whisper something to him] Is that so? Then, I thank you. I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night. Bring more torches over here! Come on, lets all get to bed.
Romeo will answer it.
Well, he is gone, and these thoughts should go with him. Now as for the situation in Irelandwe must do something to manage the rebels, my liege. If we wait too long theyll use the extra time to their advantage against us.
[To VIOLA] Come here, boy. If you ever fall in love, remember me when you feel its bittersweet pangs. Because the way I am now is the way all true lovers aremoody and fickle in every emotion, constant only in imagining the face of the person they love. How do you like this song?
[To RICHARD] When I was alive, you stabbed my kingly body full of deadly holes. Remember the Tower, and remember me. Despair, and die! Henry the Sixth tells you to despair and die!
Very good.
If you sink in love, then youre burdening it. Youre putting too much weight on such a tender thing.
That is true. I can show you a thousand paintings of moral lessons that demonstrate Fortune's sudden victims more effectively than words ever could. But you'd do well nevertheless to show the Lord Timon that even we commoners can see that he is falling.
You idiot, that doesn't mean anything! Those that seem to be the most kind are the most deceitful. But let them do what they will and what they can, why should we be afraid? Our lives couldn't be more miserable than they are now; we're halfway to the ground. Go, tell their general he can meet us here to announce why and from where he comes, and what he wants.
That's a compelling sales pitch.
Don't preach to me. I have not done a single bad thing in giving these gifts, for they were imprudently, not dishonorably, given. Why are you so upset? Can't you see that I have all the friends in the world? Don't worry, because if I could appeal to those who have received so much from me in love and work to inspire their sympathy, other men and their fortunes will prove themselves available to me. One word and someone will lend to me.
My lord, I care about my life as much as you care about yours, and I swear I care about it as much now as I ever have. Do you think I would be as confident as I am if I wasn't certain of our safety?
To supper. To our house.
My gracious lord, I come only for what belongs to me.
That's what I conceive of Petruchio.
Indeed, I will. This is the wisest course.
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet, where are you off to, and where is your home? Happy are the parents of such a fair child. And happier the man whose destiny is to share your bed!
What I say is the truth: and if I had you in the right place, I'd prove it to you.
Was I completely senseless during the hours she was cheating on me? I didn't see anything, and I didn't suspect anything. So, it didn't do me any harm. I slept well after, ate well, and was happy and carefree. I didn't see Cassio's kisses on her lips. If a man is ever robbed but doesn't realize what has been stolen, let him not know he's been robbed. And then it's as if the robbery never happened.
Sir, a special order has come from Venice to put Cassio in charge here, in Othello's place.
Was that him who just left?
My lord, there are some senators who have just arrived and come to visit you.
Did he write this?
The sun won't come out today. The sky frowns and scowls at our army. I wish there wasn't all this dew on the ground. So the sun won't shine today? Why, that shouldn't matter any more to me than it does to Richmond. The same heaven that frowns on me also looks sadly on him.
If you'll allow it, no. My luck is bad, and my doomed fate might disturb your own destiny. Therefore I will say farewell, and face the evils of my fate alone. It would be a bad way of thanking you if I burdened you with any of my troubles.
Come on, come on. You women are the picture of perfection out in public, but annoying as ringing bells in your parlors and like wild-cats in your kitchens. When you've been hurt, you act like saints, but when you're offended you act like devils. You all fool around when you should be doing your housewife duties, and you are hussies in bed.
Give signs, sweet girl, for everyone here is your friend: what Roman lord is responsible? Was it Saturninelike Tarquin, who left the camp to attack Lucrece?
Oh, what misery!
My gracious uncle
You shapeless plague of a man, please allow me to curse your cursed self for the crimes I know you've committed.
Okay.
Sometimes getting hanged saves a man from getting into a bad marriage, and as for getting kicked out, it's summer, so being homeless won't be so bad.
The air here is like a fresh, sweet breath.
Cassio slept with her; you can ask your husband. I would be damned to hell if I didn't seek out just punishment to this end. Your husband knew all about this.
My noble general, Timon is dead. His grave lies on the shore, and on that tombstone there is this epitaph, which I brought here on wax which will show you what I cannot in ignorance.
Neither did I.
And you, sir. May you live longer than me and die an old man.
Here comes the lady. Oh, a footstep as light as hers will never endure the rocky road of life. Lovers are so light that they can walk upon a spiderweb floating on a summer breeze, and still not fall. Thats how flimsy and unreal pleasure is.
Will you really?
What's the matter, my sweet Bianca? What's the matter?
Damn her, that lusty flirt! Oh damn her, damn her! Come on, come leave with me. I will go to figure out some quick way to kill the beautiful devil. Now you are my lieutenant.
You both feel the same way?
My lord, it's nothing.
Is your name Tyrrel?
My gracious uncle, tell me what I've done wrong:  what law have I broken and when?
"Farewell." And, since I hated to say goodbye without meaning it, I pretended to be so sorry for him that I couldn't even speak. Indeed, if the word "farewell" could lengthen hours and add years to his short banishment, I would have said volumes of "farewells." But since it would not, he got no goodbye from me.
Oh, Cassio, where did you get this from? This is some gift from another woman! Now I see why you haven't come to see me. Has it come to this? Well, well, well.
Never?
What's the matter here?
She was a lady who many people said looked just like me, but she was also considered beautiful. But though I can't believe all that was said about her beauty, I will publicly declare this much about her: she had a beautiful mind. Even people who were jealous of her would have to admit that. She has already been drowned in the salt water of the sea, sir, and now I seem to be drowning her memory with the salt water of my tears.
Here comes the youth with your niece. Stay away until he leaves her, and then confront him.
Youre on. What does the winner get?
Did Michael Cassio know about your love for Desdemona when you were courting her?
Only if my enemies are bleeding to death, my lord, there's no food like that. I would wish such a feast on my best friend.
[To OTHELLO] What can you say about this on your own behalf?
Did you mention that Edward's children are bastards?
[He gives ROMEO poison] Put this in any kind of liquid you want, and drink it. Even if you had the strength of twenty men, it would kill you quickly.
Bagot, wait; dont pick it up.
Did you call, sir?
Your Honor, the Ottomites have steered their fleet of ships toward the island of Rhodes, and added a second fleet to that one.
A king of beasts, indeed; if they had been nothing but beasts, I would still be a happy king of men. Good old queen, prepare to go to France: imagine that Im dead, and that here youre saying goodbye to me on my deathbed. During long winter nights, sit by the fire with good old people and let them tell you sad stories from long ago. And before you say goodnight, tell them my sad story, and send them crying to their beds: the logs themselves will weep and extinguish the fire, and some will cry in ashes, when they hear about the deposing of a rightful king.
Why "let it strike?"
[To himself] I don't know how we'll afford to.
Get out! You manly witch! Take her away, out the door! That damn busybody!
I can't swear it, now that I'm a gentleman? If the peasants and the middle class can swear, I can swear, too.
I'm healthy, I breathe, and  I see that you're sick.
It was the lark, who sings to greet the dawn, not the nightingale. My love, look at the streaks illuminating the clouds parting in the east. Night is over. Day is creeping over the mountain tops. I must leave in order to live. If I stay, Ill die.
I'll help you. But tell me the truth, are you really not crazy? Or are you just acting?
Sweet prince, you are young and innocent, and haven't experienced the deceitfulness of the world yet. You can't perceive the truth about a man except for what he shows on the outsidewhich, God knows, hardly ever corresponds with his heart. Those uncles you wish for were dangerous. You heard their sugary words, but you couldn't see the poison in their hearts, your Grace. May God protect you from them, and from all such false friends!
[To himself] If I do this right, I'll catch him.
Christ, you're not listening to me! I never even dreamed of such a thing. If I did, you'd have every right to hate me.
Poor Hermione! But what am I supposed to do? If I do my job of serving Leontes, then I have to poison Polixenes (who's innocent). Leontes is messed up in the head and wants everyone else to be miserable, too. If I do this, he'll promote me. But, waiteven if I could look through the history books and find thousands of men who'd killed kings and done well afterward, I still wouldn't do it. And, in fact, since not a single record would tell you such a story, it's obvious how wrong this is in every way. I have to get out of here. Whether I do it or not, I'll be hanged. Man, I could use some luck right about now! Here comes Polixenes.
And I know that she loves music, playing her instruments, and poetry, so I'll keep tutors in my house to instruct her. If either of you, Hortensio and Sir Gremio, know of any good tutors, then recommend them to me. I'll pay well for good teachers, and won't spare anything in giving my children a good education. So farewell.Katherine, you may stay. I have more to talk about with Bianca.
You don't have to pay us back for anything; everything we give is a gift.
Would you really do such a thing for all the world?
I know his soul is in heaven, fool.
And I love Hastings with all my heart.
I am a spirit indeed, as I have a soul. But my spirit wears the same earthly form that I've had since I was born. If you were only a womansince everything else about you fitsI would cry and hug you, and say "Welcome, welcome drowned Viola!"
Yes, the hostess's maid.
That's what the world is like, and every flatterer is the same. What is a friend who takes so much? Timon was so good to Lucilius, and kept him afloat with his own money. It's Timon who paid for his servants, and he never enjoys anything that does not owe itself to him. But how monstrous he looks for being so ungrateful! He denies him what rich men would give to beggars.
Really? Is this true?
That our grandmother's soul could end up inhabiting a bird.
I'm coming, don't worry. If I miss the tiniest bit of this joke, may I get boiled to death.
And what else?
No, sir, I live by the church.
And you're not suited for any place but hell.
You've come into my hands now, where you're likely to live.
You won't like it.
Madam, go whenever you want; leave us here.
Oh, dear lady, don't put me on the spot. I'm nothing if not overly critical.
My lord, no one in Venice would believe you just did thateven if I swore that I saw it with my own eyes. This is no small matter. Apologize to her. She's crying.
Sweet Sir Andrew.
Its the maids you rape or kill or who will have to sense it.
What's the point of calling yourself a sun?
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby, their horses bloody from spurring them on and their faces red from hurrying here.
I'll answer you by walking in. But we've been anticipated.
[To ANTONIO] He insists on talking.
Who ordered you, Camillo?
I can't get her for a cent less than a thousand gold coins.
Nothing at all. The waters are rough, and I can't see a single sail between the sky and the ocean.
I cannot.
Then you have good aim! And the woman I love is beautiful.
It's as you said, Timon is poor. And someone who is denied once does not have much hope of prospering.
Oh God!
As if the air was perfumed by a swamp.
An hour before I came, the duchess died.
Here at the door. Please, call them in.
She will invite him to dinner.
Oh, you cottage housewife, you. Go to bed, my God. Youll be sick tomorrow from staying up all night.
Go, Sir Andrew. Look for him in the corner of the garden as if you were a bounty hunter. As soon as you see him, draw your sword, and swear horribly as you draw it. It's often the case that a terrible swear word uttered with an arrogant tone can increase your reputation for courage better than actually fighting would. Now go!
Ill tell you before you ask me again. Ive been at a party with my enemy, where suddenly someone wounded me and was in turn wounded by me. But both of us can be cured by your holy power. I hold no hatred, blessed father, because my request will also help my enemy.
And you, fellow, go find my page, Bartholomew, and dress him up like a lady in great detail. When that's done, bring him to the drunkard's room, address him as "madam," and bow to him and treat him as if he were the lady of the house. Tell Bartholomew I said this: if he wants to please me, he will conduct himself properly, copying the way he's seen noble ladies act towards their husbands. Let him attend to the drunkard like that: speaking softly, acting humble and polite, and saying things like, "What does your Honor command your lady and humble wife to do, that she might show her devotion and love?" And then with kind embraces, tempting kisses, and his head resting on the drunkard's breast, Bartholomew should weep as if he's overjoyed to see his noble husband restored to health after believing for the last seven years that he was no better than a poor, disgusting beggar. And if the boy lacks a woman's gift for crying on command, an onion will serve the same purpose. Hide one in a handkerchief and put it close to his face, and that will certainly make his eyes water. Get this taken care of as quickly as you can, and soon I'll give you more instructions.
Don't worry about that. With Emilia here as my witness, I guarantee that you will have your place back as lieutenant. I assure you, when I promise to do something out of friendship, I deliver. My husband won't have a moment of rest because I'll keep him awake all night to talk his ear off about this. I'll lecture him until our bed feels like a school room and his table a confessional. I'll mention your case no matter what he's doing. So cheer up, Cassio. I'd rather die than fail on your behalf.
Here, my lord.
Where are you taking him, my lord?Cesario, my husband, stay.
[To VIOLA] And you will be my sister!
Her father loved me and often invited me to his house, where he would ask about the story of my life, about the battles and sieges I've fought in, and the good and bad fortune I've had. I told him everything, even from when I was a boy, and spoke about disastrous turns of events, moving events on land and on sea, and about times I barely escaped imminent death by a hair's breadth. I told him about how I was taken prisoner by my enemy and sold into slavery, about how I was ransomed back and how I traveled around through vast caverns and empty deserts, through rough, rocky quarries and hills so high they touch heaven itself. I told him about the cannibals that eat other humans, called the Anthropophagi, and about strange men whose heads grow beneath their shoulders. Desdemona was always fascinated by these stories, but household chores would call her away. She did her chores quickly so she could come back and listen voraciously to my stories again. When I had some spare time, she asked me to expand on the story of my travels and fill her in on what she had only heard parts of. I agreed, and my tales often brought her to tears. When I finished my stories, she would sigh. She would always say things like, "That was strange, very strange," or "That was pitiful, so pitiful." She wished she hadn't heard the moving stories, but also wished that God had made her that kind of a man. She thanked me and told me that if I knew anyone who loved her, all he would have to do to woo her was to tell her my stories. Picking up on her hint, I spoke to her. She loved me for the dangers I had endured, and I loved her because she pitied me for having endured them. This is the only witchcraft I have used. Here comes the woman herself. Let her testify.
I think you're right. Killed? The woman I killed? It's true, but it hurts to hear you say that. It hurts to think that. Please, don't say it often.
Oh, Lord, sir, for strategy. Should this babbling gossip live to tell the tale? No, lords, noand now let me tell you my full plan. One of my countrymen, Muli, lives not too far from here. Yesterday night his wife gave birth to a child like her, as fair-skinned as you. Go to him, give the mother money, and tell them the situation: if they give us their child, it shall become the emperor's heir and take the place of mine, to calm this storm in the court and let the emperor have his son. Listen, lords, you see I have given her medicine
It's fine, but it's just a painting.
If a bloody head is an injury, then you've hurt me. I don't think you care at all about a bloody head.
God's greetings to you, my lady!
Give me evidence, or at least prove it beyond an ounce of doubtor else you'll regret it!
Are you flesh and blood? Is your heart beating? You're not a ghost? You're alive! Well, keep talking. Where were you born? And why were you called Marina?
Oh, please let me not cry if Mowbray stabs me. I'll fight with him as confident as a falcon against a defenseless little bird. My loving lord, I say goodbye to you and to my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle. I may die, but I'm not sick. No, I'm young, vigorous, and still cheerfully drawing breath. And just as I leave the best for last at the dinner table, so do I turn to you, father, whose youthful spirit lives on in me and gives me strength in the fight to come. With your blessings on my lance, may it defeat Mowbray and add new glory to the name of John of Gaunt by the deeds of his son.
Oh ha, oh ha! I wish Id done it! You stopped me. If you hadnt, I would have filled this island with a horde of little Calibans.
Why are you still here?
Your Highness just told me that I should hurry there.
[To himself] Very smart, boys!
Ill groan twice for every step, since my journey is short, and go with a heavy heart. Lets be brief in wooing sorrow, since it will be a long marriage. One kiss shall stop our mouths, and well leave in silence; I'll give you mine [kisses her] and leave with your heart.
Oh, they eat lords; that's how they get pregnant.
Are you my son?
By the world, part of me thinks my wife is honest, and another part of me thinks she isn't. Part of me thinks you're trustworthy, and another part of me thinks you're not. I need some proof. Her reputation, which was as pure and fair as Diana's, is now besmirched and black as my face. If I can find any ropes, knives, poison, fire, or streams you can drown in, I won't endure this dishonor. If only I could be satisfied in this!
Yes, I swear on my life. And he hopes that you'll join his side and help him. For that reason he sends you this good news: that this very day your enemiesthe queen's relativeswill die at Pomfret Castle.
Oh, then you probably prefer money. You'll choose Gremio who will keep you dressed up in fine clothes and jewelry.
Lord, I have such a headache! Its pounding as if its about to break into twenty pieces. And on my other side my back is achingah, my back! Curse your heart for sending me out and about. I could get sick and die from all this journeying around!
[Mimicking TRINCULO's voice]  You lie.
Alas, the poor girl, I think she really does love me.
Just one more week?
Oh, help!
Not the daughter who scolds, anyway, I hope.
[Reading]"I may command the one I love,But silence, like a knife,Cuts my heart with a bloodless wound.M.O.A.I. rules my life."
I wish we could go straight from sixteen to twenty-three, or that we could put our lives on pause in between those ages. Ya don't get up to much at that age except knocking girls up, embarrassing your old folks, stealing, fighting[Seeing the basket on the ground] Well, whadaya know! Only no-good youngsters would be out in this weather! They've scared away two of my best sheep, and I'll be darned if the wolves don't find them before I do. If they're anywhere to be found, it's down by the sea, grazing on some weeds . . . [He looks into the basket] Lord have mercy, it's a baby, a very pretty little baby! Is it a boy or a girl, I wonder? Ah, it's a pretty one, you're a very pretty one, aren't you, with a pretty face. I may not be all that smart, but I can tell from your face your mama's a high-class lady. This has been some back-room, behind-closed-doors, under-the-covers business, huh, by two people who were hotter and heavier than you are now! You poor thing, come here. [He picks up the basket] I'll hold on 'til my son comes; I thought I heard him just nowHey there!
Sir, I'm capable of doing that, and I wouldn't use any fast-acting poison. I'd use something slow, that'd drift him off the sleep so that he wouldn't feel a thing. But I can't believe Hermione would do this; she's always been so good. I've been loyal to you
Give me a torch. I dont feel like dancing. Since Im sad, I might as well carry the light.
Listen, theyre roaring in pain.
And you have mercy, too! I never did anything to offend you in my life. I never loved Cassio except in a general way, as a friend. I never gave him a token of my affection.
It is true. There's magic in the sewing. A prophetess who lived to the age of two hundred sewed the handkerchief while she was in a trance. The worms that made the silk were magical, and it was tinted in dye extracted from embalmed virgins' hearts.
Has it come to this?
Won't King Richard let me speak with him?
Uncle, that is a Montagueour rival. Hes a rogue whos come here out of spite to scorn our celebration.
Hey, monster, that spiritwho you said is harmlesshas done nothing but play prank after prank on us.
Oh, the gibbet-maker! He says that he has taken the gibbets down again, for the man wont be hanged until next week.
I'm a poor fellow, sir.[To himself] I know exactly who you are.
I think your Honor means the character "Soto."
I promise I'll excite those dirty-minded men as much as I can. I'll bring some home tonight.
Shes not yet fourteen.
Come, let's go see what will happen.
Sort of, sir. Even though my share is small, I hope I won't be skinned out of it.
He really has been badly treated.
I am Thaisa, who you thought was dead and drowned.
He is as he is. I can't say a bad word about what he might be like. If he is not what he has the potential to be, then I wish to heaven he was!
What was that about? Why did he hit his wife?
Come on, Marcus, come; kinsmen, this is the way.[To Young LUCIUS] Sir boy, now let me see your archery; make sure you draw home and shoot straight. Terras Astraea reliquit: remember it. Marcus, justice is gone, she ran away. Sirs, pick up your weapons. You, cousins, will go around the ocean and cast your nets; perhaps you can catch her in the sea. But theres just as little justice there as on landso never mind. No, Publius and Sempronius, you must do it; dig with a fork and spade until you get to the center of the Earth. Then, when you get to Plutos underworld, give him this petition. Tell him I ask for justice and for help, and that it comes from old Andronicus, who suffers in ungrateful Rome. Oh, Rome! Well, I made you miserable when I threw the peoples votes on the tyrant Saturninus. Go, go away; and be careful everyone, and don't let a ship get by without searching it. This wicked emperor may have had her shipped her away. And then, kinsmen, we're searching for justice in vain.
Don't you have anything more to say? He was your brotheris there any fire left in your old blood? You're one of Edward's seven sons: those sons were like seven vials of his blood or seven branches springing from one root. Some of these seven died naturally, some by fate; but Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester, one vial full of Edward's sacred blood, one fine branch of the royal root, is broken and all the precious liquid spilled, hacked down and his summer leaves all faded by the hand of envy and the bloody ax of murder. Ah, Gaunt, his blood was yours! You were born from the same blood, the same womb; the same metal that molded you made him a man too! And although you live and breathe, you are dead in him. You have allowed your father's death, by seeing your poor brother die, who so strongly resembled his father. Don't fool yourself by saying this is patience, Gaunt: it's despair. In allowing your brother to be slaughtered, you've shown them how to kill you: what in poor men we call patience is just cold cowardice in noblemen. What more can I say? The best way to save yourself is to avenge my Gloucester's death.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
And didn't I come at last to comfort you?
Indeed, I should have asked you that earlier.
No, by the light of heaven!
Romeo, get away from here. The citizens are coming, and Tybalt is dead. Dont just stand there staring. If youre caught, the Prince will execute you. Get out of here!
Ladies! What do they want?
Do you love me?
We were laughing at you.
Then I'm not your jailer; I'm your kind hostess. Come on, I'll ask you all about your and my husband's shenanigans back when you were kids. You were cute little kings-to-be back then, weren't you?
Hey, what's going on here?
Oh, terrible day!
Hes acting like Juliet, exactly like her. Oh awful sympathy! What a dreadful predicament! Shes lying on the ground just like him, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. Stand up. Stand up. Stand up if youre a man. For Juliets sake, for her sake, rise and stand. Why do you moan so terribly?
[Whispering] Ah, that villain!
Yes, brother, more than I want to think about.
That might be, sir, when Im married.
How are you, brother?
We can't accept this.
Explainand clean up your language.
That he was never trained to be a soldier.
I'd consider it light and trivial even if it were heavier.
Sweetheart, so do I. But I would pet you so much it would kill you. Good night. Good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow that I will say good night until it becomes tomorrow.
But I didnt say anything.
Go bring them here now.
They are well, dear madam. But if you'll pardon me, I'm not allowed to let you visit them. The king has strictly forbidden it.
I'll do it straight away.
Good job fixing that. Kiss him for that, good widow.
Now my plan is coming to its conclusion. My spells are not breaking, my spirits are obeying me, and everything is running smoothly. What time is it?
[Joining them and sitting] If the oldest sorrow is the most revered, then give mine the privilege of seniority, and let my grief have the upper hand. If you can accept company in your sadness, then consider your losses again by looking at mine. I had an Edward until a Richard killed him. And I had a husband, Henry, until a Richard killed him. You had an Edward until a Richard killed him, and you had a Richard, young York, until a Richard killed him.
They admit they had were too quick to forget your good deeds, which they take back now that you have stopped aiding them, knowing full well that it is their fault for not extending their hands to you in your time of need. They sent us to tell you about our sadness, along with a repayment greater than their crime could possibly weigh on you. Indeed they promise such heaps of wealth and friendship that it should make you entirely forget how they wronged you, feeling within yourself instead such sentiments of love that you will always consider them your friends.
Alas, who knows?
Cut the devil down; he doesn't deserve such an easy death as hanging.
You have no reason to.
Very well.
And what would you like me to do at Salisbury?
The man is a hero and has killed many of our enemies. How bravely did he fight and wound many men in the last battle?
Maybe so, but it's keeping my promise and therefore it's the right thing to do. Camillo, I wouldn't break my vow to Perdita, not for the whole country, the sun, the earth, and the sea. So, as my father's friend, please put in a good word for me when he realizes he misses me (since, by the way, I won't be seeing him anymore). Maybe I'll come back onto his good side in the future. You can let him know that Perdita and I are sailing away on a ship I have nearby (which is lucky, though I had it ready for something else). I won't tell you where we're going, though.
No, really, I'm fine. [To himself] See how our bodies give us away, giving other people a chance to laugh at us! Just now, looking at my son's face, I went back in time twenty-three years and saw myself back before I wore pants, in my green velvet coat, with a blunt practice sword (it was blunt so that I didn't cut myself, since that kind of toy is dangerous when you're a kid). Back then I was so much like this kid. [To MAMILLIUS] Buddy, would you let yourself be robbed?
I am sorry to hear this.
Unless he's coming to be your new king, you can't guess why that Welshman Richmond is coming? You will rebel and join him, I fear.
Alas, sir, this is bad news for me. I have money orders from Florence, and I must deliver them here.
The waves are coming in over the sides of the ship, and the clouds have covered the moon so it's completely dark! I can't do anything!
Oh, it is sad how love, which in theory seems like such a gentle thing, should in actual experience be so rough!
Yes, I know her age to the hour.
It's useless to speak with Timon. He only trusts himself, and nobody that looks anything like a man appears friendly to him.
Why, that's the same thing.
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
There's no man bolder than Lord Hastings. He knows me well, and loves me well.
Romeo, come here. Come here, you frightened man. Trouble follows you, and youre married to catastrophe.
Well, isn't that something: locking up an innocent woman and keeping her from friendly visitors. Am I allowed to see any of her servants? Emilia?
If you're just going to repeat the same old things, my lord, then it will be as pleasant to my ears as hearing howling after listening to beautiful music.
Will you walk with me, sir? And oh, Desdemona
Honorable Brabantio, I come to you in all honesty and good will
I swear, he's half-drunk. Who is that at the gate, uncle?
No, towards Whitefriars Monastery. Wait for me there.
Oh, how amazing to hear a devil tell the truth!
But is this true, sir, that you've married my daughter without asking for my permission?
[Offstage] You have enough wood in your shack.
My lord?
Dont swear at all. Or, if you must swear, swear by your magnificent self, which is the god I worship like an idol, and Ill believe you.
Mistress, we have.
I'll toast to that, lieutenant! And I'll match you, drink for drink.
[To himself] As Cassio smiles while we talk, Othello will go mad. And his unrestrained jealousy will misinterpret poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and jovial behavior. [To CASSIO] How are you doing now, lieutenant?
[As CAMBIO] I study what I teachThe Art of Love.
Thanks, noble lord, but you've priced me ten groats above what I amI'm not even a noble, let alone royal.  Who are you? And how did you get in, since no one ever comes here but the sad jailer that brings me just enough food to keep me alive?
Your fortune is made, old man. Someone must have forgiven the sins of your youth; now you're set for life. Gold! All gold!
So it is, my lord.
Go and find the coroner then, and let him investigate my unclefor he's in the third degree of drunkenness, and has drowned. Go look after him.
I do not. Who are you?
If our noble father is still alive, why do you look at us and shake your head, and call us orphans, wretches, and castaways?
"Fine!" Things aren't "fine," man. Things are not going very well. No, things are going horribly, and now I've been tricked into a big mess.
Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight. Ever since the Duke's young messenger visited Lady Olivia, she's been in a strange mood. And as for Mister Malvolio, let me take care of him. If I can't trick him into making a fool of himself and turn him into a big joke, then I'm not even smart enough to lie straight in my bed. I know I can do it.
All right. Good God, how foolish our minds can be! If I die before you, please wrap me in one of these same sheets.
If that's so, then I wish my sister didn't have a name, sir.
It's not a natural thing to kill someone for loving. Alas, why are you biting your lower lip? Some bloodthirsty passion is shaking your whole body. These are bad signs, but I hope they do not point to something that is going to happen to me.
So you're sure we've arrived in Bohemia?
And so it is here the best, where it sleeps and doesn't do any harm.
I don't think so. They're flying white flags to show they come in peace. They're coming as friends rather than as foes.
Father, it's like this: you and everyone else who've talked about her have all been wrong. If she's a shrew, then it's for some crafty purpose, for she's not naturally willful, but is in fact as modest as a dove. She's not fierce, but as mild as the morning. She has the patience of Griselda and the chastity of Rome's Lucrece. To conclude, we've gotten along so well together that Sunday will be our wedding day.
I'm no paid messenger, my lady. Keep your money. It's my master, not myself, who's going without his due reward. May the man you fall in love with have a heart of stone, and may your passion, like my master's, be scornfully rejected. Farewell, you beautiful cruelty.
Good Maria, take care of this fellow here. Where's my cousin Toby? Let some of my servants take special care of Malvolio. I'd give half my wealth to keep him from harm.
Just a little one, really, no more than a pint I promise, on my soldier's honor.
Yes, but it hasn't frightened me. So I'll go back to sleep.
Until now the blood of twenty thousand men made my cheeks red with triumph, but now they're gone; and until so much blood comes to me again, don't I have good reason to look pale and dead? Anyone who would be safe, leave me! For time has ruined me.
[To himself] What? The king's gone?
His Majesty was so concerned for my personal safety that he appointed this escort to conduct me to the Tower.
I won't stop bothering him now until he reinstates Cassio. [To OTHELLO] How are you doing, my husband?
Well, if you did, I wouldn't be offended; I'd be glad.
Wheres my mother? Why, shes inside. Where else would she be? What a strange answer! Your love says, like an honorable gentleman, Where is your mother?
A good and fast answer, but also one for the dogs.
[To himself] What about Antioch?
Isn't that why you're here too?
I'll follow him too, and see how this turns out.
What is this noise? Give me my long sword. Now!
Oh, you think so? You're one-in-a-million, shepherd girl.
Ah, but he is young, and while he's young he is still in the care of Richard, the Duke of Gloucestera man who loves neither me nor any of you.
With a tinge of green in it.
It's him, yes, him
He's probably here already. So don'tby God, quiet! I hear him.
Take each other's hands; let's make a wedding contract! [To POLIXENES and CAMILLO] Our new friends will be our witnesses. I give my daughter to him in marriage, and will give them equal parts of my fortune.
And now I remember, my lord, you complimented me the other day when I rode on a great horse. Since you liked it so much, take it!
What, you'll leave with my tongue in your tail? No, come back, good Kate. I am a gentleman.
What's up, fool?
I am a man-hater, who hates mankind. I wish you were a dog, for your good as well as mine. Then I could love you at least a little.
Won't you stay longer? And don't you want me to go with you?
Well, well, I see how it is: I can't do anything about it, I admit, because my army is weak and too small to fight. But if I could, by Him that gave me life, I would punish you all and make you stoop under the king's power. But since I cannot, be it known to you, I will remain neutral. So, go on your way; unless you'd like to enter in the castle and sleep for this night.
For saying that, rest assured, Ill give you cramps, pains in your sides that will make it hard to breathe. Goblins shaped like hedgehogs will come out at night when they are free to act, and do their worst to you. Every inch of you will be stung, and each sting will hurt more than beestings.
We're just making him more angry. Let's go!
Gods, listen, help me!
Everyone, leave us alone. I will hear this "holy message."
[To himself) "Odors," "willing," and "receptive." I'll have to remember those.
Shake off your drowsiness. Come on. Well go and visit Caliban, my slave who never has anything nice to say to us.
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death I can see life; but I dare not say how close we are to finding hope.
Very well, then. You must not think that I am drunk.
Sir?
What is it, scoundrel?
That's not good. My mother was given that handkerchief by an Egyptian woman who could read people's minds. She told my mother that as long as she had the handkerchief, she would be desirable and my father would be helplessly in love with her, but if she lost it or gave it away, my father would hate her and he would go after other women. Before my mother died, she gave the handkerchief to me and told me to give it to my wife whenever I married. I did this, and so keep it close like a precious treasure. To lose that handkerchief or give it away would be a sin greater than any other.
I'll go. Write to me very soon, and I'll tell you how she feels.
Good day to you, my gracious lord.
What does his majesty say?
Go to your bedroom. Ill go bring Romeo to comfort you. I know where he is. Pay attention: your Romeo will be here tonight. Ill get him. Hes hiding in Friar Lawrences cell.
She's a good wenchI swear.
Who told you how to find my my bedroom?
But are you biting your thumb at us, sir?
Yes, husband. Can he deny it?
I swear perfect love for Rivers, or may I never prosper.
You lie, I swear, for you are called Kate, plain Kate, and pretty Kate, and sometimes Kate the shrew, but always Kate, the prettiest Kate in God's kingdom, Kate from Kate Hall, my delicious Katefor all delicacies are Katesand so, Kate, listen to me: having heard your modesty, virtue, and beauty praised in every town, though not as highly as you deserve, I have been moved to court you for my wife.
Oh, my brother! I'm thinking through the wrong I did you all over again; your friendly message only makes me feel more guilty. You two are as welcome as spring is on earth. And has Polixenes put this beautiful girl through a long, uncomfortable boat journey just to see me, who's hardly worth the trouble?
I'll get you back, I promise.
Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear. There's hardly anyone who isn't unreasonably worried right now.
Then you're correct. I am not what I seem to be.
He's a soldier, and to accuse a soldier of lying is as bad as stabbing him.
You traitor, you told your wife to do this. My child? Get it out of here! Since you seem to care so much about it: take it away and watch it burn. I want it to be you and no one else. Do it immediately, and come back within an hour to confirm you've done it. If you're not honest with me about it, I'll execute you and your entire family. If you refuse, you'll have my anger to deal with, plus I'll dash its bastard brains out with my own two hands. Go! Take it to the fire as punishment for what you've made your wife do.
[To himself] I'll play your own little game. What a magnificent god is gold, that it is worshipped in a place grosser than a pigpen. It is the thing that rigs the ship and sets it on its journey, the thing that makes a slave honor his master. May people continue to worship it! May its disciples forever be chased with its own unique plagues. It's about time to talk to them.
[As LUCENTIO] Is it possible, my dear friend Litio, that Bianca could prefer another man over me? I tell you, sir, she's been very friendly towards me.
Plantagenet.
Alas, there would be more danger for me in one angry look from you than there would be from twenty of your relatives with swords. If you just look at me with love, their hatred would not be able to touch me.
We see the ground on which these bodies lie, but we wont be able to figure out the true cause of all these awful events without an investigation.
Now, masters, draw.
Now listen to outcome of their secret alliance. The king of Naples, who had always been an enemy of mine, listened to my brothers request. Antonio asked that the king, in return for his oath of loyalty and however much money he paid to the king each year, would immediately remove me and all of immediate family from Milan, and then give the dukedom to my brother. So then, they raised an army to pull off this treachery. At midnight on the date theyd chosen to act, Antonio opened the gates of Milan, and in the deep darkness had the agents hed chosen for the job rush me and you, crying, out of there.
I am the governor of the country you are now in.
I never did her any wrong, to my knowledge.
From heaven! Oh, sir, Ive never been there. God forbid I should barge into heaven when Im still so young. Why, Im going with my pigeons to the tribune of the plebs, to deal with a fight between my uncle and one of the emperors soldiers.
Go away you angry dog, or I'll kick you!
Well, I'll see what I can do for you. If I can help you, I will.
What does that trumpet sound mean?
No, because the princess just heard about the statue of her mother, which Paulina has. It's been in the works for years and was just finished by Julio Romano, the Italian master, whose sculptures are incredibly lifelike. His "Hermione" statue looks so much like her that you'd be tempted to speak to it and wait for an answer. They've all hurried to see the statue, and they're planning to have dinner there.
Oh, cut it out. If these men are all right with it, we'll let them in. Go quickly!
What game should we play in this garden, to distract ourselves from our sad thoughts?
Then do it.
You're being arrested? For what reason?
He came with flowers to put on his ladys grave. He asked me to stand apart from him, and so I did. Soon after someone with a torch came to open the tomb. One thing led to another, and my master drew his sword to fight him. Thats when I ran away to call the watch.
But master, if I worked in a church, I'd want to be there for that.
What else are we going to do? Weren't we born under the sign of Taurus?
It would not be better that way, because you'd still be with yourself.
God save your majesty! and greetings, gentlemen: I hope the king has not left for Ireland yet.
You cant find a reason without my giving you one?
who lived by a church." I'll whisper it so quietly that the crickets out there won't be able to hear it.
Come, come and be patient. We have to bring you to our captain.
Give it then, so we can call you both a pimp and an idiot, which would not be any worse than what you are now.
I'm sure he'll be here tomorrow in his best clothes.
While I wait I'll come up with some horrible message to be the challenge.
There are other instances of such things happening. The Lady Strachy married her wardrobe assistant.
Forgive me, madam: I am sad to say it, but what I say is true. King Richard is imprisoned by the powerful Bolingbroke. Weighed against each other, Richard has only himself (and his vanities make him light); on his side of the scale, Bolingbroke has, in addition to himself, all the English noblemen, and with those odds the scale tips in his favor. If you send a letter to London to ask for news, you'll hear the same; I'm only saying what everyone already knows.
I beg your Grace to forgive me, and now please stop talking to the Duke of Clarence.
I'm bleeding. I'm mortally wounded. Cassio must die!
Let's see: every sheep yields eleven pounds of wool, every pound of wool is worth a dollar and a penny, and we've shaved fifteen hundred sheep. How much does that make us?
"M.O.A.I." The hidden meaning of this part isn't like the other one, but if I force it a little, it too could refer to mefor every one of these letters is in my name. Wait, there's some more prose now.[Reading]"If this should fall into your hands, consider it well. By birth I am ranked above you, but don't be afraid of my greatness. Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them. Your fate welcomes you. Accept it with your body and spirit. And, to prepare yourself for the upper-class life you will have soon, cast aside your lowly outer self and become a new, fresh person. Be rude to your companions, and be mean to servants. Talk loudly and often about politics, and make a habit of being unique and eccentric. The woman who sighs with love for you advises you to do this. Remember who it was who complimented your yellow stockings, and asked to see you always wearing crossed laces going up your legs. Remember her, I say. Now go. You are assured of becoming a gentleman, if you want to be. If not, just keep acting like a steward, a companion of servants, and not worthy to grasp the greatness before you. Farewell. Signed, one who would switch places with you and be your servant,The Fortunate Unfortunate"Daylight in an open field couldn't be clearer than this. This is obvious. I will act proud, I will study politics, I will insult Sir Toby, I will rid myself of lower-class acquaintances, and I will act exactly as she asked me to. I'm not fooling myself now, or letting my imagination trick mereason points to the inevitable conclusion that my lady Olivia loves me. She did compliment my yellow stockings lately, and she did praise my crossed laces, and in this she has proven that she loves me. I thank my lucky stars. I'm so happy. I will act just as she wantedI'll be proud and aloof, and put on my yellow stockings and crossed laces as quickly as I can. May God and my lucky stars be praised! And here's more, a postscript.[Reading]"You have probably figured out who I am. If you accept my love, then let me know by smiling. Your smiles look good on you. So please smile whenever you're in my presence, my dear sweetheart."Thank you God! I will smile for her. I'll do everything she wants me to.
Poor heart, farewell. I pity your troubles.
Good Boatswain, be careful! Wheres the Master? Urge these men to work harder.
Where?
My widow means that that's how she understands you.
This ring lifts my spirits!
Alas, alas! It is not right for me to tell you about what I have seen and learned. You will see for yourself, and his actions will show you what he is like, so that I don't have to tell you. Go follow after him, and just watch how he acts.
Lord Mayor, the reason we sent
Sir, this is the man who can answer whatever questions you may have.
He has no friends except for those who are too afraid to leave him. But they'll abandon him in his time of greatest need.
Hey, strike a match! Light me a torch! Wake everyone up! This whole situation is not unlike a dream I had. And I'm worried it's coming true. Lightgive me light!
I'd be a cock without a comb, if Kate will be my hen.
That's what he ordered. Therefore, good Emilia, give me my night gown and then goodbye. We must not displease Othello now.
Ill take the risk and eat. Even if this turns out to be my last meal, that's all right, since I know the best part of my life is in the past. Brother, my lord Duke, please have some food as well.
Oh no, you were a little angel who kept me alive. While I cried salty tears into the ocean and groaned under my burden, you smiled with a strength and courage that came from heaven. That gave me the courage to face whatever was going to come.
Benvolio, who began this deadly fight?
[Offstage] Ding-dong, bell.
This is a funny ballad, but it's pretty, too.
God forbid that I should intrude on confession! Juliet, I will wake you early on Thursday. [Kissing her] Until then, goodbye, and keep this holy kiss.
Iago? Oh, I have been ruined and undone by villains! Give me some help.
Judge us by our actions.
I wish we had a thousand Roman ladies like that, to take turns serving our lust.
She's a virtuous princess.
As much as we do? But our evil is worse. And our profession isn't really a "trade" or a "calling." But here comes Boult.
Oh, Juliet, I already know why youre so sad. Its too difficult a problem for me to know how to solve. Ive heard that on the coming Thursday you must marry this count, and nothing can delay it.
Stephano! If you are Stephano, touch me and speak to me. Because Im Trinculodont be scaredyour good friend Trinculo.
These sad drops on your blood-stained face are the last marks of respect and love from your noble son!
Saint Francis, speed my steps! How often tonight have my old feet stumbled on gravestones! Whos there?
I'm glad you're all here. I love honor; anyone who hates honor hates the gods above.
[Singing] His eyes do show that his life is almost over.
His name! As if I didn't know his name! I raised him ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.
This is the man. Do your duty.
Cassio!
Have you been chosen specially, just to kill the innocent? What is my offense? Where is the evidence against me? What jury has sentenced me in front of a frowning judge? Or who has pronounced this death sentence on me before I could be convicted by a court of law? To threaten me with death is wrong. If you hope to be saved by Christ's dear bloodwhich was shed for our sinsthen I tell you to leave now without touching me. The deed you plan to do is punishable with damnation.
I'm all out of luck, but I'll go in with the rest. The only thing I can hope for now is a share of the feast.
Well, bring her in, then!
[To himself] It's amazing how these fishermen have gone from talking about fish in the sea to explaining the men's weaknesses, and how, from their watery corner of the world, they've come to understand everything that men could think of or discover.[To the FISHERMEN] Hello there, honest fishermen.
You will stand him. What, boy? I say you will. Get out of here. Am I the master here, or you? Get out. You wont stand him? God save my soul, youll start a riot among my guests! And youll crow like a rooster, like youre the man!
Thanks to him and to you. I'm honored.
Well, God hopes the doctor will help him to his grave immediately! The money in his coffers will pay for coats for our soldiers in these Irish wars. Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him: pray God we may get there quickly, but come too late!
It would be a tedious story to tell, and a rough one to hear. Suffice it to say that I've come to keep my promise, though I'll have to deviate from it some. I'll explain all this to your satisfaction later, when there's more time. But where is Kate? I've been away from her for too long. The morning is passing, and it's time we go to church.
Oh, why should I be silent when I'm so angry? I'm no baby that will pray and ask forgiveness for the evil things I've done. I'd do ten thousand worse things, if I could. If I ever did one good thing in all my life, I regret it from my very soul.
My lord, I want to claim the gift you promised me on your honor and faiththe earldom of Hereford and all the possessions that go with it, which you swore that I would have.
It is my son, young Harry Percy, sent by my brother Worcester, wherever he is. Harry, how is your uncle?
I admit it doesn't seem that way, and you are not stupid or unjustified to have suspicions. But, Roderigo, if you have courage, dedication, and braverywhich I now more than ever think you dothen prove it tonight. If you do not spend the next night with Desdemona, then feel free to take me away and devise ways to kill me.
[To himself] I see that she's likely to have neither a cap nor a gown.
Well, girl, youre weeping not for his death, but rather because the villain who murdered him still lives.
Thats how you will show me friendship. Take this. [He gives BALTHASAR money] Live and be prosperous. Farewell, good fellow.
You told me that you hated him.
Everything he says, we say with him.
Careful, uncledon't misunderstand me further than you should.
What do you want, madam? How are things going with you?
Oh all-seeing God, what a terrible world!
There is no better man on earth than my husband.
To happy people, perhaps; but grief makes one hour feel like ten.
Well, if we had customers from every country in the world, we'd welcome them in, since they either have syphilis or will do soon.
Hes drunk right now. Where did he get wine?
What's six years? They'll pass before you know it.
Come on, you're joking. She won't tell us anything.
I'll go back into the house and ask for a protective escort from the lady. I'm no fighter. I've heard of some men who pick fights with people on purpose, just to test their bravery. This man must have that kind of personality.
Where else should his eyes be sunk? Hed be quite a remarkable monster if his eyes were sunk in his tail.
Who doesn't know that he's dead? Who knew that he was!
Did you see how he laughed about his crime?
What do you think is the matter?
Sir, give me your arm.
Peter!
Valentine!
What is his name?
to fight for Edward's side and help him win the crown. And his reward for that, the poor lord, is to be imprisoned. I wish to God that my heart was made of stone, like Edward'sor that Edward's heart was soft and emotional, like mine. I am too childlike and innocent for this world.
It's bad for a country to be ruled by a child.
All the world is a huge thing. It would be a great reward for a little misdeed.
Yes, I carry pigeons, sirnothing else.
Alas, this is a sad day. Why are you crying? Am I the cause of these tears, my lord? If you suspect that my father has something to do with your being called back home, don't blame me for it. If he has cut ties with you, well then he has cut ties with me, too.
To cart her, is more likely.
Goodnight, good Captain Blunt.
Thank you, sir.
You wouldnt ask a sick man to seriously write out his willit would only make him feel worse. Seriously, cousin, I do love a woman.
Well, fine.
You got your prize.
Old lord, I cant blame you, since Im so tired that I'm becoming sad. Sit down and rest. In this spot I'm going to give up all hope. The one whom we're trying to findand getting ourselves lost in the processis drowned. The sea is laughing at us as we search for him on land. It's time to let him go.
Thats the song you were singing, played by nobody.
Here is the cap your Worship asked for.
What happened to Antigonus, who carried the baby to Bohemia?
I can't do it without a calculator. Let's see: what do I need to buy for the sheep-shearing party? Three pounds of sugar, five pounds of grapes, riceno idea what my sister needs rice for, but my dad set her up as the debutante of the party, and she's in charge. She made bouquets for all twenty-four of the men who'll shave the sheep tonight. They're all decent guys, but they're rascals. There's only one religious guy out of all of them, and he's really strange. I need some spices for the pies, herbs . . . dates? No, not dates. Some nutmeg, a bit of ginger (but I could get that from a friend), four pounds of prunes, and tons of raisins.
Marshal, ask that knight in arms both who he is and why he comes here dressed for battle. And formally, according to our law, ask him to explain why he thinks his accusation is justified.
Don't worry, my lord. We can control ourselves even if he's the greatest buffoon in the world.
Here's Desdemona's father's house. I'll call out.
My lord.
Heres a good bet. Which of the two, Gonzalo or Adrian, will speak first?
Let's go there, and then change course for Tyre. How soon can we get there?
That's strange.
Yes, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
No, I see your bad luck now. Those were great times when you had your wealth.
Feeling the loss so strongly, I cant help but weep for him forever.
There was a time when, if you had been so brief with him, he would have been so brief with you as to shorten your body by a head.
Oh, I wish that I could serve that ladythen I wouldn't have to reveal myself to the world until I was ready to identify my place in society.
How far is it to Berkeley? And what business keeps good old York there with his soldiers?
Weve seen a sad scene here.
Will nobody come? I'm going to bleed to death.
That's a good question, because he doesn't have it with him. It's hidden.
I don't doubt it, sir, but you'll regret your wooing if it's successful.
What, do you dare to be so blunt with me?
[To LEONTES] Hey, are you all right? How are you, brother?
Let's go, fool.
Have you wronged me? Well, then.
I didn't think he had met her.
Why is this so hard? Well, man, if you won't knock, I'll ringwring your ears and make you sing!
Oh, you virtuous woman! We have definitely come across temptation since then. But back in those days, my wife was still a young girl, and you hadn't yet caught my young playmate's eye.
I will drown myself right now.
Here's another ballad about a fish that washed up on the coast on Wednesday, April twenty-fourth, miles away from the water, and sung this ballad to warn cold-hearted girls. People thought she was a woman who'd been turned into a fish for not having sex with her boyfriend. The ballad is both sad and true.
No, my good lord; he has left the court, broken his staff of office and dispersed the king's household.
Why, they're both here, baked in that pie. Their mother has been daintily eating the flesh of her own children. It's true, it's true; I'll prove it with my sharp knife.
[Offstage] If you try to get by, you'll pay for it. You have no weapon, and so you'll surely get hurt.
How? By turning your back and running?
My lord, my answer can only come from my Lord of Lancaster; I am here to seek that name in England; and you must call me by my proper title before I can reply to anything you say.
Ill be right there!
No, no, my dream continued after I died. Oh, then the real storm of my soul began! I passed over the river of death with the help of Charon, the ferryman of the underworld, and I entered the kingdom of perpetual night. The first soul to greet me there was my great father-in-law, the Earl of Warwick, who cried aloud, "What terrible punishment for oath-breaking can this dark kingdom inflict on that false Clarence?" And then he vanished. Next a shadow like an angel came wandering by, with its bright hair spattered with blood, and it shrieked aloud, "Clarence is herefalse, fickle, lying Clarence, who stabbed me in the field at Tewkesbury. Seize him, avenging devils. Take him and torture him." With that it seemed like a legion of foul demons surrounded me and howled in my ears, and their cries were so loud and horrible that I woke up trembling. And for a long time afterward I still believed that I was in hellthat was how terrible an impression this dream made on me.
I do have a daughter named Katherina, sir.
Hortensio, listen. This gentleman has arrived at a fortunate time, I thinkfor both our good and his.
Beast!
But
[To the FOOL] What are you doing here with these people? And how are you Apemantus?
I have it, Tranio!
Oh, gentlemen, see, see! Dead Henry's wounds have opened and are bleeding again!
Here. Tell me the bad news that you hurried to bring us; I can't imagine it's good news you bring.
Hey, Helicanus!
Im not biting my thumb at you, sir. But I am biting my thumb, sir.
What? It's a night of celebration, man! The gentlemen want you to join.
He subdues her by acting like her.
The more I suffer, the angrier he seems to get. What, did he marry me to starve me? Even beggars who come to my father's door get money when they ask for it. If not, they find charity elsewhere. But I, who never learned how to beg and never needed to beg, am starved for food and dizzy with lack of sleep, kept awake by curses and fed only with arguing. And what puzzles me more than all these troubles is that he does it all under the pretense of perfect love. He acts as if I would get sick and die right away if I were to sleep or eat. Please, go and get me some food. I don't care what it is, as long as it's filling.
With him? But that's not possible.
Alas, sir, be patient. What do you have to say, sir? I've just been scolded for speaking to you.
Hardly wise enough to keep yourself warm.
Why, isn't he with the queen?
Well then, let's go home again.
This behavior is a symptom of your infected nature, which has caught an unmanly melancholy due to bad luck. Why this shovel? In this place? In these tattered clothes? With these sad looks? Those who flattered you still wear silk, drink wine, and lie down on soft beds. They hug their perfumed, diseased women, and have totally forgotten that Timon even existed. Do not curse these woods by becoming a cynic. Be a flatterer and look to live off what once undid you. Bow your knee and heed every word of the men you would flatter as genius. Praise the worst parts of a man and call them excellent. That is what you used to be told. You once gave your ears to men like bartenders give their ears to the worst villains and rascals. It is only fair that you become a rascal. If you had your money again, rascals would have it. Do not act as I did to you, act like them!
Let me see your eyes. Look into my face.
Good, and brave.
Then I am satisfied. And once again, I'll regard you as an honest man. He who is not satisfied with someone else's repentance is not of heaven or of earth. For repentance pleases both people on earth, and also God. Repentance calms God's anger. And to prove that my friendship can be honest and generous, I give you my claim to Silvia.
He knows what?
Ill support you.
If the only thing keeping us from being happy is my deceptive masculine clothes, then don't hug me until every circumstance of place, time, and luck fit together and prove that I am Viola. To confirm this, I'll take you to a captain in this town who has been keeping my woman's clothing, and who saved my life so that I might serve this noble Duke. Everything that's happened to me since then has involved this lady and this lord.
Dont be afraid of her, Lucius; she means something. See, Lucius, how much she loves you; she wants you to go somewhere with her. Oh, boy, Cornelia never read to her sons with so much care as Lavinia reads you sweet poetry and Tullys Orator.
[To the nuns] Take care of the lady, she's just overexcited. [To PERICLES] Early one morning, this woman washed up on shore. I opened the coffin, found some expensive jewels inside, revived her, and made her a nun here in Diana's temple.
What does "pourquoi" mean? Does it mean to do or not do? I wish I had spent more time learning languages instead of fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting. Oh, if I'd only studied more!
Hush, Gremio. Even though you and I don't have the patience to put up with her loud cries, why, man, there are good fellows in this world, if we could only find them, who would take her with all her faultsand enough money.
Beautiful lady, don't curse yourself, since you are both my day and my life.
Calm down, now.
Though I have far more reason to curse you, I don't have her energy. I'll just say "amen" to everything she said.
Yes, too gentle.
Let me go, sir, or I'll  strike you on your head.
[He takes out his sword] Break it up, fools! Sheathe your swords. You dont know what youre doing.
Calm down.
Yes, with Cassio, mistress. Now come on, hold your tongue.
I remember that you overthrew and replaced your brother Prospero.
[She picks up DESDEMONA's handkerchief] I am glad I have found this handkerchief. This was Desdemona's first gift from the Moor. My stubborn husband has asked me to steal it a hundred times, but she loves it so much (for Othello asked her never to lose it) that she always keeps it with her to kiss and talk to. I'll have the embroidered pattern copied and give it to Iago. God knows what he will do with it. God only knows. I certainly don't. I just like to make him happy.
My father-in-law Capulet wants it that way, and Im not at all interested in slowing him down.
Ah, for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
Should I go and get your nightgown?
Sir Topas the priest, who is here to visit Malvolio the lunatic.
Why do you think so, mighty lord?
A blessed good evening to you. Excuse me, sir, do you know how to read?
Let's get going and do what he says. God sent him to help us.
The furious Tybalt has returned.
The evil thing you warned me of is all too true. She is gone. And all that's left of my life, which I now hate, is bitterness. Now, Roderigo, where did you see her? Oh, unhappy girl! Did you say she was with the Moor? Who would want to be a father in such a situation as this? How did you know it was her? Oh, she has tricked me beyond anything I could have thought possible. What did she say to you? Get more torches, and wake up my whole family. Do you think they've gotten married?
[To TRANIO] Sir, if I may be so bold as to ask you, have you even seen Baptista's daughter yet?
[To himself] Is this one of Timon's servants? Great! I dreamt last night of expensive gifts. [To FLAMINIUS] Welcome, Flaminius. [To the SERVANT] Go get some wine for us.
Oh comforting friar! Where is my husband? I remember well where I should be, and here I am. Where is my Romeo?
It's important to be healthy. What do you have under your cloak, Flaminius?
Now, noble peers, we are meeting today to come to a decision about the coronation. In God's name, speak. When will the royal day be?
Alas, how sad! I cant remember crying then, but now Ill cry about it all over again. This story wrings tears from my eyes.
I always long to serve you, my lord.
The quickness and boldness with which I have taken control of my future clearly show that I married the Moor so that I could live with him. My heart is completely under his control. I saw Othello's true nature in his mind, and dedicated my soul and all my fortune to his honor and bravery.  So, my dear lords, if I am left behind while he goes off to war, I will be deprived of seeing the very things I married him for. And I will have a horrible time here without him. Let me go with him.
"Madam Alice," or "Madam Joan?" What's her first name?
My lord, I promise
You'll have plenty of wine soon enough, my lord.
Is it really possible that such bad men can exist when there are good ones too? You and your money sicken me.
Either be patient and treat me with courtesy or I'll drown you out with the noisy music of war.
Ask me nothing. You know what you know. From now on I will never speak again.
Oh, dear father, dont be too harsh with him. Hes a gentleman, and not a coward.
There's no other way. She must be the one to do it. And what luck, here she is! Go and ask her.
Why shouldn't Iif I had the heart to do itkill what I love, like that Egyptian thief Thyamis who murdered the woman he loved just before he died? That kind of savage jealousy sometimes seems noble. But listen to me now: since you keep denying my faithful love, and since I can guess who has forced me from my rightful place in your heart, you can go on being a cold-hearted tyrant as long as you likebut I'm going to take your darling Cesario from you. I know that you love him, and I swear that I care deeply for him as well, but I must tear him away from you because his place in your heart humiliates me.
Did you call me, sir?
I see that your name is Lucentio. Where are you from?
I did. I brought up his earlier engagementsto Lady Lucy, who bore him a child, and Lady Bona in France. And I described the insatiable greediness of his lust, and his rape of citizens' wives. I reminded them of his harsh punishments for trivial offenses, and said that he was nothing like the duke your father, as the duke was away in France when Edward was conceived. Then I brought up your own appearance and suggested that you were the spitting image of your father, both in your looks and in your noble mind. I described all your victories in Scotland, your discipline in battle, your wisdom in peacetime, your generosity, your virtue, and your noble humility. Indeed, I didn't leave out anything that might have helped your case at all. And then when my speech came to an end, I asked those who loved their country to cry, "God save Richard, England's royal king!"
Well I wouldn't do it by light either. I might do it in the dark, though.
My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
No, you certainly won't. Now that you've gotten started, be ready for a sharp joke or two!
As long as heaven and nature lengthen it.
If there's anything I didn't do correctly, know that I meant to do it better. You've repaid me for everything, and now you, Polixenes, Perdita, and Florizel have come to visit my little house. It's extremely gracious for you to be here, and I can never thank you enough.
Raise an army, my lordRome has never been under attack like this before. The Goths have arrived with an army of soldiers intent on sacking the city. They come here under the command of Lucius, old Andronicus's son, who threatens to take as much revenge as Coriolanus ever did.
Master, I'm not sure if he's a merchant or a schoolmaster, but he's well-dressed and looks old and respectable enough to be Lucentio's father.
I hope my noble lord thinks I am honest.
Come, come! I love you and your father as if I were his own subject rather than a foreigner. We expect him to visit any day now, and when he does, what will he say when he finds our little princess in poor health? He'll wish he hadn't come so far, and he'll blame my husband and me for not taking care of you like we promised to do. Go, please. Walk, be happy, bring back those rosy cheeks we all love so much! Don't worry about me; I can go home alone.
[To LUCILIUS] Do you love this young woman?
[Offstage] Who's knocking?
Whos that calling so loudly?
I will go find him. Cassio, stay around here. If I find him in a good mood, I'll plead your case and try my hardest to get you your job back.
Oh sir, such a life with such a wife will be strange! But if you have the stomach for it, then godspeedand you'll have my help in everything you need. But will you really woo this wildcat?
Get out of town! What kind of man are you?
Oh, your husband's an honest fellow. Cassio, do not doubt that I will soon have you and my husband as close as you were before.
I say a devil. Do you really think, Hortensio, that any man is foolish enough to marry hell itselfeven if her father is very rich?
Don't ask to see this letter.
Thanks.
No, I think she is alive.
It did, it did. Unfortunately, it did.
Huh. I don't like the looks of that.
See how they kiss and flirt! Sir Lucentio, take my hand. I firmly vow to stop wooing her forever. I reject her as a woman unworthy of all the time and money I have so foolishly flattered her with.
For shame! What kind of foolish "obedience" do you call this?
Yes, I heard, but who is he?
No, my good lord. My friends are in the north.
No, he said such insulting, rude things against your sense of honor that it took all the goodness in me to hold back from hurting him. But I beg you to tell me, sir: are you safely married? Because you can be sure that Senator Barbantio is well-liked in the city, and has twice as much influence as the Duke. He will divorce you two, or at least subject you to whatever restraint and punishment he has the power to inflict.
Trinculo, if you interrupt his story again, I swear by my hand, Ill knock out some of your teeth.
Well, that's from staying up too late. It will go away soon. Let me just tie this handkerchief tight around your head and it will feel better within an hour. [She pulls out a handkerchief]
May blisters cover your tongue for making a wish like that! Romeo was not born to have anything to do with shame. Shame could never be connected to him, because he is destined only to experience great and total honor. Oh, I was such a beast to condemn him.
Give me a torch to carry. Let those with light hearts dance. Theres an old proverb that fits me perfectly: Ill hold a torch and watch. The game looks like fun, but Im done with it.
[To himself] She speaks. Speak again, bright angel. For tonight you are as glorious as an angel, shining above my head like a winged messenger from heaven; one who makes mortals fall onto their backs to gaze up in awe as the angel strides across the clouds and sails through the air.
If I have to do something, it must be something brave, for I hate politics. I'd rather be a heretic than a politician.
Amen.
Whether I like it or not, I'm a courtier. Can't you see my courtly clothes? Don't I walk like a courtier? Smell like one? Look down my nose at you like one? Just because I'm asking you questions, you think I'm not a courtier? I'm a courtier from head to toe and I have the power to help you to court or to stop you right there. For that reason I command you to tell me everything.
My freedom.
She hangs on me like this and cries on my shoulder and shakes and pulls me like this! Ha, ha, ha!
Go to Ventidius.
[To the gentlemen and guards] What, do you tremble at the sight of him? Are you all afraid? Alas, I don't blame you, for you're only mortal, and mortal eyes can't stand to look at the devil.
[To CALIBAN] Now, kiss my feet.
If I told you my story, you would think I was lying.
Do you doubt that, Antonio?
Foolishness, sir, wanders about the earth like the sun. It's everywhere. I'd be sorry if your master was less acquainted with foolishness than my mistress is. I think I saw you there, you wise man.
Whos calling? My mother? Why is she up so late, or so early? What could possibly be her reason for coming to see me?
I pray to God that he keeps his promise!
I'm an honest man who takes things literally, so I thought you had been seriously wounded. That would be worse than losing your reputation. Reputation is an empty, stupid idea. Often people get good reputations when they don't deserve it, and people lose their reputations unfairly. You haven't lost your reputation unless you consider yourself to have lost it. Come on, man, there are ways to gain back the general's favor. He's just in a bad mood, and he punished you because he had to in front of the men of Cyprus, not because he dislikes you. It's like someone beating their dog in front of a strong lion, when the dog did nothing wrong, just to show the lion that he's powerful. Ask Othello's pardon, and he'll be your friend again.
Yes, madam.
Yes, boy, Im ready.
A burning torch turned upside down, with the motto, "That which lights me snuffs me out."
Did she see you at the time though, old boy? Tell me that.
If you'll sit down, Ill carry your logs for a while. Please, give them to me. Ill carry it to the pile.
I wish you had my bones, and I had your news. I beg you, speak. Good, good Nurse, tell me!
If love is rough with you, be rough with love. Prick love when it pricks you, and youll beat love down. Give me a mask to put over my face. A mask to cover that mask I call my face. What do I care if someone sees my flaws? Let the this mask, with its dark eyebrows, blush for me.
Iago, I realize that your affection for Cassio makes you downplay what he has done. Cassio, I love you, but you are no longer one of my officers.
Yes.
Please tell me, what is the proper punishment for someone who conspires to kill me with wicked plots and witchcraftand who has already plagued my body with hellish magic?
What is going on?
Good father, Im on my knees, begging you, please be patient and let me say just one thing.
[To DORSET] You go to Richmond, and may good fortune go with you.
Fool!
[Outside]Are you there, my liege? For Gods sake, let me in.
Very few people, and most of them are peasants.
May the best happiness, honor, and fortune be yours, Lord Timon!
Quiet, for shame! Your outcries are no cure for confusion. Both you and heaven played a part in giving you your child. Now heaven has her, and she is better off. The part of her that came from you could not stop her from dying, but the part she got from heaven gives her eternal life. The most you could hope for her was that she marry well. Your idea of heaven for her was that she move up the social ladder. Yet now you weep, even though she has risen up above the clouds, all the way to heaven itself? Oh, by mourning her death you love your child so poorly, going crazy even though she is well and in heaven. It is better for a girl to die young while her marriage is still fresh and loving than to be married for a long time. Dry your tears, and place your rosemary on this beautiful corpse. And, as is the custom, put her in her finest clothes and carry her to church. Its human nature to shed tears, but reason says that we should be joyful.
Are you in love?
Here she is, sir.
The ship that saw all this is now docking here. It came from Verona, bringing Michael Cassio, the lieutenant of the warlike Moor Othello. The Moor himself is still at sea, having been ordered to come here to Cyprus.
Musicians, oh, musicians! Play Hearts Ease, Hearts Ease. Oh, if you want me to live, play Hearts Ease.
We're grateful to you, Andronicus.
So shes sworn to live her life a virgin?
Is it true? Then I defy you, fate! [To BALTHASAR] You know where Im staying. Go there and get me some ink and paper, and hire some horses. I will leave here tonight.
Why, Belman is just as good, my lord. He was the only one to howl when the scent was lost completely, and twice today he picked it up when it was weakest. Trust me, I think he's the better dog.
[To himself] That we've found you out, that's the news, and know that you're rapists.[To CHIRON and DEMETRIUS] With all respect, my grandfather has sent me to bring you the best weapons from his armory to amuse your honorable youth, for you are the hope of Rome. He told me to tell you that, and so I do. And I present you these gifts, your lordships, so that you can always be armed whenever you need toand with that, I'll go. [To himself] Armed like murderous villains, that is.
Did you find him? His servants? Was Camillo with him?
Why, there they go: God give joy to his lordship!
In truth, I think I should do it, and then undo it after. Really, I wouldn't do such a thing for a ring, or for fine linen, or for gowns and petticoats, or for caps, or for any little gift. But for the whole world? Why, who would not cheat on her husband in order to make him king of the world? I'd risk being punished in purgatory for it.
To whom?
Well, sir, since you've given me permission to speak, I will. You're right to be afraid of Antiochus, since he'll either wage a public war or kill you privately. So, I recommend that you get away and don't come back until he either gets over his anger or dies. You can trust me to rule the country while you're gone; I'll be as faithful as day is to the sun.
I forgot about Calibans evil conspiracy with his companions to kill me. The time for them to act on their plot is almost here.[To the spirits] Well done. Now leave, no more!
I wish your obedience was just as foolish. The wisdom of your obedience, fair Bianca, has cost me a hundred crowns since dinnertime.
My legs are yellow, but I don't feel blue. The letter came to me, and its commands must be obeyed. I think I recognized the fancy Italian handwriting.
Why do you call them villains? You don't even know them.
We are amazed; and have waited a long time for you to kneel to us, because we thought ourself your lawful king.
Of course, ma'am.
Will you be loyal to me, if I need your help?
What're you doing up here? If you wanna see the darnedest thing you ever did see, get yourself over here! What's the matter with you, boy?
Once again, goodbye.
Camillo, haven't you seen (but you must have, unless your glasses are as thick as a cuckold's horn) or heard (since something so obvious must have started rumors) or thought (for only someone incapable of thinking wouldn't have thought of this) that my wife is unfaithful? Unless you're planning to say "no" or you're willing to claim that you're blind, deaf, and dumb, admit that my wife's a slut who deserves every name you'd call a corner prostitute. Just say it and swear by it.
[As LUCENTIO] No, sir, but I hear that he has two, the one as famous for her scolding tongue as the other is for her beauty and modesty.
My land extended all the way to Sparta.
Come now. You can be as hot-blooded as any man in Italy. You get angry at the smallest thing, and when youre in the mood to get angry you always find something to get angry about.
You said you would believe me. I won't bother you anymore; I'll stop there.
Let's get out of here.
What is that trumpet?
It's not good to contradict him; let him go on.
Lord Lucius and princes of the Goths, the Roman emperor sends his greetings. He understands that you are here with an army, and asks to meet with you at your father's houseif you ask for hostages to ensure your safety, they'll be immediately sent to you.
I'd prefer not to believe you, sir, on this issue. I'd rather see Hermione defended, no matter how you might be blamed for starting things.
We'll go for a little walk in the garden, and then to dinner. Please, know that you are all very welcome here and make yourselves at home.
Then both, or one, or anything you want.
Take that, and that. [He stabs CLARENCE] If all this won't do the job, then I'll drown you in that wine barrel.
Wow, she's warm! If this is from your magic spell, your magic should be considered an art as natural as eating.
One face, one voice, one manner of dressing, but two people! An optical illusionit both is and is not!
Cursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! The most miserable hour that ever existed in all of time. I had just one child livingone poor child, one poor and loving child. Just one thing to rejoice and find comfort in. Now cruel Death has stolen her from my sight!
Who's this first knight?
Welcome, Lord Thaliard of Antioch.
Yes.
Welcome, my lord. Well, is my mother coming?
Good lieutenant, is your general married?
It's a strange truth.
[Whispering] Oh, quiet! Now he's really lost in his imagination. Look how his fantasies puff him up.
When I was banished, I was banished as Hereford; but as I come, I come for Lancaster. And, noble uncle, I ask you to be indulgent with me: you are my father, for I think in you I see old Gaunt alive. Oh, then, my father, will you allow me to stand condemned as a wandering beggar, my rights and income taken from me by force and given away to upstart spendthrifts? Why was I born? If my cousin is King of England, it must be that I am Duke of Lancaster. You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin; if you had died first, and he was treated this way, he would have found in his uncle Gaunt a father to fight for him. I am refused the right to wear the colors of the dukedom of Lancaster here, although I have the legal right to do so; my father's good are all liquidated and sold, and these and everything he owned are put to ill ends. What do you want me to do? I am a subject, and I challenge the law: I am denied attorneys, and therefore I've come here to claim my inheritance in person.
I've killed the girl who made my eyes blind with tears. I am as miserable as Virginius, and have a thousand times more cause than him to do this horrible thing. And now it's done.
It was, Andronicus.
Oh, please! I've been around for twenty-eight years, and ever since I've known the difference between a good thing and a bad thing, I've never yet found a man who knew what was good for him. I'd trade in my humanity to become a baboon before I'd ever say that I'd drown myself for the love of some hen.
I'm sure you will also confess that you love me.
I have.
How does he love me?
Most mighty king, you have no reason to doubt my friendship. I never have been false, and never will be.
It's burnt, and so is all the rest of the meat. These servant dogs! Where is the rascal cook? You villains, how dare you bring me this meat when you know I don't like it overcooked? There, take it back, plates, cups, and all!
Is it on record that he built the Tower, or is it just reported by word of mouth from generation to generation?
Its almost morning. I want to force you to go. Yet I would not let you move any further than a spoiled child would let his pet bird go. The child so loves the bird that he will not let the bird hop any more than a small distance from his hand before pulling it back by a silk thread.
Those that dance might, sir.
I think she does, and that's why she is mourning.
Why else would I live in a Christian country, if I can't be forgiven for my faults?
Fierce warrior Lucius is general of the Goths? This news nips me like a flower covered in frost or grass beaten down with storms. Yes, now our sorrow comes; the common people love him. When I've disguised myself and walked through the streets, I've often heard them say that Lucius was wrongfully banished, and that they wish he were their emperor.
No, monster, not me.
Madam, the guests are here and dinner is served. Your guests call for you and Juliet, while the servants in the pantry are cursing the Nurse. Things are getting out of control. I must rush off to serve the guests. Please, follow right after me.
Should I kiss your feet?
[As CAMBIO] Now, mistress, have you been making progress in your studies?
What, do you think we're heathens or savages? You think that we would have broken the law and executed this villain unless it was a case of extreme danger, with England's peace and our own lives at stake?
I'll come to see you, your Lordship.
A love song, a love song.
Hey, gentlemen! Helicanus is calling.
I know they do, and I deserve it.
I want to know your thoughts.
Please, let them be admitted.
That's it. Do it and I'll love you forever. If you don't do it, you're signing your own death warrant.
And so well do what were told. Gag them, dont let them speak a word. Is he tightly bound? Make sure they cant escape.
You are beautiful, shepherdess. And we see what you did thereyou gave us winter flowers because we're old!
To tell the truth, it's all your fault.
[He falls] Oh, Ive been killed! If you are merciful, open the tomb and lay me next to Juliet.
[As LUCENTIO] And you too, sir. Welcome. Are you going farther, or is this your destination?
If you let her leave like that, Sir Andrew, you don't deserve to ever draw your sword again.
I've sent a servant to deliver her the letters explaining your continued love and affection for her.
The window lets day in, and now my life goes out the window.
Look! See how quickly she turns the pages.
Again, we'll sail over miles of miles of ocean as if it were nothing, hopping from country to country and region to region, by the power of your imagination. Forgive us for using the same language in all these different places where our scenes are set for the sake of simplicity. Now let me fill you in on what happens next, in the gaps between the parts of our story: Pericles takes to the unruly sea once again, along with many courtiers. He's coming to see his daughter, the light of his life. Old Escanes, Helicanus's friend whom he left in charge, is governing while he's gone. Keep that in mind, since Helicanus is going along with Pericles. With a sturdy ship and a good wind at his back, Pericles arrives in Tarsus. Just imagine his ship and all its cargo, arriving here to take Marina home, who's gone. Watch them move like ghosts and shadows for a while, and then I'll explain in words what you've just seen.
If it weren't for the fact that my fellow tutor was watching Bianca so closely, I'd think it would be good to just elope in secret. Once the ceremony was performed, it wouldn't matter if the whole world disapprovedI'd keep my wife, despite what anyone might say.
Nature would produce everything people needed, and all of it would be shared equally by all. Thered be no treason, crimes, swords, spears, knives, guns, or need for any other weapon. Without any human help, nature would grow bountiful harvests to feed my innocent people.
We've heard as much, even though we've never met the man. Still, I can tell you something else which I've heard as a rumor: Timon's best days are behind him, and his estate is shrinking beyond his control.
How great a house gone bankrupt! How great a master fallen! Everything's gone! And there's not a single friend to help him in this unfortunate time and accompany him!
Monster, come here. Put some sticky birdlime on your fingers, and carry away the rest of this stuff.
And he now possesses jewels from Timon, which I lent him the money to buy.
If I don't marry your niece, then I'm going to be in horrible financial trouble.
I can't stay here?
Oh, heaven, how did she get out of the house? Oh, she has committed treason against her own blood! All you fathers, from now on do not trust your daughters' minds based on how you see them act. Aren't there magic charms out there that can trick and violate young maidens? Roderigo, have you read about such things?
When I wore it at your daughters wedding.
I'm glad that your highness is so prepared to handle my sad news. Bolingbroke covers your fearful land with bright steel and hearts as hard as swords, like a stormy day that makes the rivers overflow and drown their shores. Old men have put on helmets to cover their thin and hairless scalps; boys with women's voices try to sound like tough men; your own archers turn their bows against you; even washer-women are taking up rusty pikes against your throne: both young and old rebel, and everything goes worse than I have power to tell.
Your life insurance? Youre a fool!
Aumerle, you lie; he is as honest and honorable as you are unjust. And to prove it, here I throw my gage [throws down gage]  to prove it in battle: pick it up, if you dare.
Here it is.
To continue this metaphorin the first chapter of his heart.
What happens if I obey you? How would the Duke like that, when he has just sent messengers here to bring me to him on urgent business of the city?
Let's at least wait until the war is over. There is no worse time to be honest than a war.
Lets go, then! Lets do this quickly.
My God, now it's even at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.
Kind Tyrrel, will your news make me happy?
Yes, my lord. How do you feel, now that you're on land again after that rough sea journey?
My lord, you know I care about you.
Uncle, uncle, it's so early in the dayhow are you already so sick?
Don't mistake me, my lord; I didn't mean to erase one of your titles. To you, my lord, I come, whatever lord you are, from the most gracious regent of this land, the Duke of York, to ask why you take advantage of the king's absence to frighten our natural peace with your army.
What, by God, may she do? She may marry a king, a bachelor, a handsome young man. Certainly, your grandmother had a worse match.
Yes and I'm still proud that I am a wasteful man still. I would still give all the wealth I havenothingto you. Get away from me.[Gesturing to a root] I wish all of Athens were in this! I would eat it!
Thank you, sir.
You wanted to be king of the island, sir?
Plant syphilis into the hollow bones of men. Kick their shins and cripple them. Steal the voice of the lawyer, so he will never ever defend a false case or voice his small disagreements. Give diseases to the priest who scolds against carnal pleasures, but doesn't behave himself. Make it so his nose rots off, so that for his private pleasures he loses the scent of public welfare. Make curly-haired scoundrels bald, and have the silly macho men in the army finally feel some pain from you. Give diseases to everyone, so that in your profession you defeat all of men's power. Here's some more gold, so that you damn even more. But let it damn you, too, and send you to your graves!
[To RICHARD] Remember Grey, and let your soul despair!
Only asked! Maybe I'll become a beggar too, and talk my way out of a whipping.
Oh, my beautiful warrior!
Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
[To himself] That will be never.
Margaret.
Say that I did all those things out of love for her.
Tyrrel, come back to me soon after dessert, and tell me the details of their deaths. In the meantime, think about how I can reward you with whatever you desire. Farewell until then.
Its not as deep as a well or as wide as a church door, but its enough. Ask for me tomorrow, and youll find me a grave man. My time in this world is done, I believe. May a plague strike both your families. God! That dog, that rat, that mouse, that cat has scratched me to death! That braggart, that scoundrel, that villain who fights as if he learned it all from some manual!
I don't need any help in mourning. I am full of sorrows to complain about. May all the earth's springs keep my eyes replenished with tears, so that when the tide is high in the ocean of my weeping, I can drown the world. Ah, for my husband, my dear lord Edward!
My life, sir! What do you mean? That sounds serious indeed.
What an annoying fool this man is!
Lord Northumberland should be more respectful and say "King Richard"; God forbid such a sacred king should have to hide.
You haven't offended usyou offended the king.
Oh generous sun, suck all of this rotten dampness from the ground into the air below the moon! In the case of twin brothers, who were identically conceived, housed, and born out of the same womb into a world with different fortunes, it is the one with more who scorns the one with less. Human nature is subject to many evils, and cannot bear great riches without reserving contempt for those without such luxuries. I will become a beggar and restrain the lord within me, for the senator will be scorned, the beggar honored. Whether or not one is wealthy is only a matter of luck: if an ox is born into abundant pastures, he will grow fat, whereas if he is born into scarcity, he will grow thin. Who? Who will dare to stand up for what's right and call a man a flatterer? After all, if one man is a flatterer, so is everyone, because every level in a hierarchy is flattered by the one below it. Smart men bow to rich fools. Everything is ridiculous, because we have nothing rational within our nature, just straight villainy. Thus I hate all feasts, society, and groups of people! Timon hates anything that resemblesor ishimself. All men go to hell! Earth, where are your roots?
I can't believe it. Wait, what's that noise?
A bridegroom, you say? More like a groom who cleans stables, a grumbling groom, as that girl will soon discover.
[To FERDINAND] Come on. Obey me. Your muscles are like those of a baby, without strength or energy.
Well, you might miss your chance if you keep talking.
The Lord of York is always argumentative. Uncle, you know how to bear with him.
By repeating what Ive said before. My child is still extremely young. Shes not even fourteen years old. Lets allow two more summers to pass before we consider her ready for marriage.
And he died on the day that Viola turned thirteen.
But what does he look like, and how old is he?
Any assistant to a money-lender is a fool. My girlfriend is a fool, and I am her fool. When people come to borrow from your bosses, they come with sad faces and leave with happy ones, but when they come to my girlfriend's whorehouse, they come with happy faces and leave with sad ones. What's the reason for this?
I think that the soul is very noble, and I disagree with his belief.
To anger you.
I don't have to obey you, sir.
Oh, look, sir, look, sir! More of us are here. I predicted that so long as there were gallows where a man could be hanged on land, this man would never drown.[To BOATSWAIN] Hey, you offensive man, who swore so much it was as if you threw God overboardaren't you going to swear now that you're on land? What news do you have?
Oh, look how fast you're moving now! Come on, then, or I'll come after you with a vengeance.
[Whispering] Oh, quiet! I hope the mood strikes him to read it out loud!
She didn't send you away to go get her fan, her gloves, her mask? Nothing?
All I want you to think about is having a good time! You know, the gods turned themselves into animals for the sake of love: Jupiter became a bull, Neptune became a ram, and the sun god, Apollo, became a shepherd just like I am now. And their transformations weren't for girls as beautiful as you. Or as puresince, you know, I'm not trying to move too quickly here. My commitment to you goes beyond physical desire.
Yeah, and she gave him whatever she had; he's food for worms now! But I'll go search the market.
Honestly, I'm telling you, I'm dying for one, [To herself] though I don't want it on my own chinI'm dying for a certain man with a beard.
Is it good news or bad news, that you come bursting in here?
Go, fool. Order your servants aroundnot me.
[As LITIO] How quickly he earns his degree! Now tell me, please, what just happened? I thought you swore that your mistress Bianca loved no one in the world better than Lucentio.
[Reading] "I will ambush you on your way home, and if you happen to kill me there"
No way! Ventidius and Lucullus denied him? Has he approached me for a loan? It shows little Timon's friends loved him that all three of these men refused him, and now I must be his last hope! All his friends benefitted from the charity that leaves him without money, and now leave him for broke like doctor does a case he has deemed helpless. Must I now try to cure him of his debts? What a disgrace and an unenviable position for me! I cannot understand why he did not come to me firstI was the first to receive a gift from him, after all. Does he think so poorly of me as to believe I would be the last to repay him? No, and that way I'll have reason to laugh at him and all the others, who have called me an idiot. If Timon had approached me first, I would have three times the amount he asks for. But now, servant, go back to him and tell him this: whoever scorns me this way will never get my money.
Oh sir, I will, and I'll always consider you the savior of my life and liberty.
Where?
I'll grant your request, whatever it may be.
We'll bear the brunt of his insults with you.
Much!
We did observe[he sees Aumerle]. Cousin Aumerle, how far did you go with mighty Hereford on his journey?
What is going on, my lord?
Mistress! Hey, mistress! Juliet! Fast asleep, I bet. Hey, lamb! Hey, lady! Hey, you sleepyhead! Hey, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Hey, bride! What, not a single word to say? Enjoy this last bit of sleep now. Get a weeks worth of sleep, because tonight, I bet, Count Paris will make sure that you dont get much rest. God forgive me. Indeed, and amen. How sound asleep she is! I have to wake her. Madam, madam, madam! Yes, let the count take you in your bed. Hell wake you up, no doubt. Wont he? [Opens the bed curtains] What? Still dressed in your clothes but asleep. I must wake you. Lady, lady, lady! No, no! Help, help! My ladys dead! Oh curse the day I was born! Hey! Get me some brandy! My lord! My lady!
I do like paintings, and this one is  looks almost exactly like me. Sometimes, because men can be duplicitous, a man becomes only what he lets other people see from the outside. But these pencil marks in your painting are no more than they appear to be. I like your work, and I'll let you know soon how much I like it. Wait here until you hear from me.
Listen, sir, do you know where you are?
Trinculo, stop trying to cause trouble. If you interrupt this monster one more time then, I swear by my hand, I'll stop being nice and beat you until you're as stiff as a piece of dried fish.
Okay. I wish you had never seen him!
What did Northumberland say regarding Richmond?
You kiss as if youve studied how.
I went to find another poor friar from our order to accompany me. He was in this city visiting the sick. I found him, but the town health officials suspected that we had both been in a house where people were infected with the plague. They sealed up the house and refused to let us out. So I was stuck, and couldnt go to Mantua.
My lord, I've been considering the request you just asked me about.
Oh, why does the new king bring me here before I have shook off my own regal thoughts? I havent yet learned to flatter, bow, and bend my limbs: give me some time to learn how to submit. And yet I remember the tokens of respect from these men: were they not my subjects? Did they not sometimes shout all hail to me? So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve disciples, found that they were all truthful except for one: I, in twelve thousand, dont have one true friend. God save the king! Why doesnt anyone say amen? Do I have to be the priest and the clerk? Well then, amen. God save the king! Although Im not him: and yet amen, if heaven thinks its me. What can I do for you?
I'm glad to see that you are angry.
Gremio, now is not the time to express our love. If you're willing to be polite and listen to me, then I'll give you some news that's equally good for both of us.
I'm contagious, even though I'm not sick? You have to explain. Listen, Camillo, I demand, if you're honorable and you believe me to be, too, that you tell me what horrible things are coming my way. Tell me how far off they are (or how close at hand). Tell me how to avoid it or, if I can't, how to deal with it.
No, sir, I'll fight.
Here, stand behind this wall. He'll come soon. Keep your sword unsheathed, and then drive it into him. Quick, quick! Don't be scared. I'll be at your side. We win or lose everything with this. Think about that, and be firmly resolved for the task.
To whom, my lord? With whom have I been unfaithful? How am I false?
That's a crude sentiment.
Is that so.
I don't know, sir.
[Approaching the tomb] Romeo! Oh no! Whats this blood staining the stony entrance of this tomb? Why are these swordsdiscolored by gore and bloodlying abandoned here, in this place of peace? [He looks inside the tomb] Romeo! Oh, hes pale! Who else? What, Paris too? And covered in blood? Ah, during what cruel hour did this sad turn of events occur? The lady moves.
What can you see out on the sea?
[To himself] Poor little thing, youre overwhelmed by love! These lovesick words prove it.
Are you a register for gentlemen, Kate? Oh, put me in your good books!
What kind of a devil are you to torment me in this way? This sort of torture is fit only for hell. Has Romeo killed himself? Say yes and that single word will poison me more terribly than could even the deadly gaze of the cockatrice. I will cease to be myself if you say that Romeo killed himself. If hes dead, say yes. If not, say no. Those little words will determine my joy or pain.
She may deny it, my lord, for
I promise you, Timon, you have moved me greatly.
Bad news, my lord. The Bishop of Ely has fled to Richmond. And Buckingham, backed by his army of hardy Welshmen, is on the march, his power still growing.
The good King Simonides, huh?
She looks something like you.
Thank the Lord for my recovery!
Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.
Yes, its true. And the Kings lords were killed, as well as the Duke of Milan and his brave son, too.
If you show me a thousand people who have wronged you, I'll take revenge on all of them.
Whats all this, nephew? Why are you so furious?
All our receipts.
Me, too, son.
Then plainly tell her my loving tale.
Then I swear by myself
What's the trumpet for?
Rip pieces of my heart out.
If you don't tell the truth because you're partial to Cassio, then you don't deserve the title of soldier.
I can't wait to hear the story of your life, which must be an extraordinary thing to hear.
I fear that both your heart and your words are false.
And hello to you, sir.
They say I'm like you.
I'll wear boots to make my legs look a bit thicker.
Is it that insulting?
Wait, Petruchio. I must go with you, for my own treasure is in Baptista's keeping too. He has my precious jewel hidden away in his fortress: his youngest daughter, the beautiful Bianca. He keeps her away from me and her other suitors, my rivals for her love, as he assumes it will be impossiblebecause of those character defects I already describedfor Katherina to ever find a husband. Baptista has therefore set down this rule: no one will have access to Bianca until Katherine the shrew gets a husband.
No, I swear on my Christianity. If the definition of not being a whore is to preserve my virginity for my husband and not let any other foul man unlawfully touch me, then I am not one.
Cousin Buckingham and you wise, solemn men, since you intend to force the crown onto my headto bear its burden whether I want to or notthen I must have the patience to endure the load. But if any foul scandal or ugly criticism comes of this, the mere fact that you forced me to accept must clear me from any future blame. For God knows, and you can see, how reluctant I am to accept this responsibility.
We have heard that. But that is not why we've come.
Arm yourself, my lord. The enemy is on the battlefield.
With the help of God. A nobleman from Naples, Gonzalo, had been put in charge of the task of abandoning us at sea. Out of charity, he gave us some food and fresh water, as well as clothes, linens, supplies, and other necessities that have over the years been so useful. Also, he was so noble and kind, that, knowing how much I loved my books, he gave me some books from my library that I value more than my dukedom.
Send for more money, knight. If you don't end up with her in the end, then I'm a fool.
Something about Cyprus, I would guess. It's an urgent matter. The warships have sent a dozen successive messengers this very night, one after the other. Many of the senators have woken up and met, and are now already at the Duke's. You've been urgently called for. When you couldn't be found at your home, the Duke sent three separate search parties to look for you.
I sweardamn the king's crazy delusions! We have to tell him about the baby. We will. It's a woman's job and I'll do it myself. I won't have many nice things to say to him, I can guarantee you. Emilia, please tell the queen that I'm completely at her service. If she'll trust me with her tiny newborn, I'll show it to the king and will advocate for her to the best of my ability. It's hard to say how he'll reacthe may be touched when he sees her. Sometimes the silent testimony of pure innocence can persuade when words fail.
Madam, Im not feeling well.
Why, then it's time to arm myself and direct my troops.
You're speaking a language that I don't understand. It's as if my life were being made up by your dreams; I'll lay down what life I have now.
I'm thankful to my liege, that out of kindness to me he shortens four years of my son's exile: but little good it will do me. For before six years have passed, the lamp of my life will have gone out with age; my candle will have burned down, and death's blindfold will stop me from seeing my son.
Sir, this chest washed up on the shore from a shipwreck.
Why, you're right. It is a puny little cap, a tart crust, a plaything, a silken pie. I love you more for not liking it.
Master, if I ever said "loose-bodied gown," you can sew me into the skirts of it and beat me to death with a ball of brown thread. I said "a gown."
Well, theres a chance he may do her some good. Shes a stubborn good-for-nothing little whore.
Look, here comes my girlfriend's little man.
Here, my good lord.
Here it is.
I told him that your father was in Venice, and that you expected him in Padua today.
I don't have any great dedication to do this deed, but Iago has given me satisfactory reasons to do it. It's just one man to kill. Go forth, my sword: he will die.
I wont be a part of this. Well miss our opportunity and we'll all get turned into geese or apes with wretchedly low foreheads.
But how long will her sweet life last?
You, old manwho, like Adam, are commanded to tend this gardenhow dare you talk about this sad news so rudely? What Eve, what serpent, has persuaded you to make man fall a second time? Why do you say King Richard is deposed? Do you daresince you're little better than dustto predict his downfall? Say, where, when, and how you heard this news? Speak, you fool.
Alas, sir, how did you lose your sanity?
Ah, mistress bride, have we woken you up?
Ma'am, please stop. Anything you could possibly say would be better than that.
Accost her, Sir Andrew, accost her.
Now, Catesby, what does his Grace say?
I have heard a bit about your bad luck.
Hed grow useless, stinging nettle plants all over it.
But what if it's not true, son?
Do you have any sense?
An offer, uncle, that we will accept: but we must persuade your grace to go with usto Bristol castle, which they say is held by Bushy, Bagot and their accomplicesthe caterpillars of the commonwealth, which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
I'm bound for your niece, sir. I mean, she's the destination of my voyage.
The heads of the maids or their maidenheads. Interpret my comment in whichever sense you prefer.
He's a madman, and his insanity is what drives him. He gave me a jewel the other day, and now he has beaten it out of my hat. Have you seen the jewel?
Oh, sweet England![Singing]King Stephen was a good fellow,He paid just a dollar for his pants,But still thought he'd been overcharged,So he called the tailor a rogue.He was a man with a good reputation,And you're just a lowly man,It's pride that brings the country down,So wrap yourself up in your old cloak.Some more wine!
Isn't this strange?
A stool.
And I say, "Cousin Toby, since fortune has allowed me to marry your niece, I have the right to say this"
[Kneeling]  I kneel to add my pleas to my mother's.
So may I prosper, as I swear the same thing.
He means, my lord, that we should be doing more, since Bolingbroke grows stronger in power and arms through our lack of opposition.
My heart is ten times lighter than my appearance.
Well, I'd like to get a chance to see you later, because I really would like to speak with you.
I am crippled forever. Help, hey! Murder! Murder!
Yes, he's good enough when he feels like it, and I am too. He has more experience, but it comes to me naturally.
He was Aumerle; but his earldom is lost for being Richards friend, and madam, you must call him Rutland now. I will vouch for his loyalty in Parliament.
My leg has been cut in half.
Why should this catastrophe be accompanied by so many words?
I'll listen. You have no idea how much you've startled me by calling yourself "Marina."
If that's true, then I think the same thing of you.
That's good. And I have met a gentleman who has promised to help find a fine musician to teach our lady. So I won't fall even a step behind in my duty to fair Bianca, my beloved.
It's really true, if we can believe the circumstances. You might have to see the evidence to believe it: Hermione's scarf, her necklace, letters in Antigonus's handwriting, the girl's resemblance to her mother, her obvious nobility which proves she's not a shepherdess . . . all this and more proves that she's the king's daughter. Did you see the meeting of the two kings?
Sir, you can thank yourself for this great loss, because rather than give your daughter to a husband in Europe you instead threw her to some African. It's a good thing you'll never see her again, since then she won't be around to remind you of this awful thing you've done to her.
He was a good man until the disaster that destroyed him in a single night.
Go, fellow, take them to the pantry and make them all welcome. See that they have whatever they need.
[Whispering] Such a clever girl, I say.
I don't know.
Yes, it is still perfect now. But Im afraid it will never be perfect again.
Then who took my letter to Romeo?
Ask Desdemona to help you, and you'll surely get it back. [To CASSIO so only he can hear] Now, if it were Bianca who had the power to help you, I imagine you'd be running off to her as fast as you could!
[To RICHMOND] Wake up, and believe that Richard's guilty conscience will be his downfall! Wake up, and win the day!
Fifteen years! By God, that's quite a nap. But did I not speak that entire time?
Please, explain them.
Who's there? Whose voice is it that keeps saying murder?
May they live on forever.
If you're just going to make fun of me, I want nothing to do with it. But wait, here's a coin for you.
But you give me part of your cares with your crown.
What's going on? What's wrong with you, that you didn't help me? By God, the duke will hear about how you've neglected your duty.
[Calling offstage] Hey, do you hear that? You must come greet the master and countenance the mistress.
Twenty crowns.
But if she cannot love you, sir?
Yes, she saw me as plainly as I see you now.
What's going on here?
Sir, very closely.
That they are borrowed or rented and not entirely in your possession.
Oh, then teach me to forget how to think!
[As LUCENTIO] Sir Hortensio, I've often heard of your sincere affection for Bianca, and now that I've seen with my own eyes that she is unfaithful, I will join you, if you like, in rejecting Bianca and her love forever.
Now I will stand up. [He stands up and puts on his magic cloak] Sit still, and listen to the rest of the story of our sad times at sea. We arrived here on this island. I, as your teacher here, have given you a better education than other princesses get, because they have so many opportunities to spend their time more foolishly and do not pay as close attention to their teachers.
Madam, your majesty is sad too often: you promised, when you parted with the king, to lay aside depression and be cheerful.
Have you come to make confession to Father Lawrence?
Who said she didn't?
Will you betray your noble mistress like this?
If only I could meet that man someday.
Well, sir, sometimes he acts like a Puritanopposed to anything fun.
Pardon me, sir! My eyes were so blinded by the sun that everything I see looks young and fresh. But now I can see that you're a respectable old gentleman. Pardon me, please, for my crazy mistake.
Yes, you are.
Forgive me, dear father.
Oh please, let's see it. Is it for the Lord Timon?
Rosaline whom you love so much is going to attend Capulet's traditional feast, along with all the beautiful woman of Verona. Go there and, without bias, compare her to some of the girls Ill point out to you. Ill show you that the woman you think is as beautiful as a swan is in fact as ugly as a crow.
[Interrupting the song] Well, we can finish this song by ourselves later on. My father and the gentlemen are having a serious discussion and we won't bother them.[To AUTOLYCUS] Come on, bring your merchandise and follow me. Ladies, I'll buy something for both of you. Give them their first choice. Follow me, girls.
And I swear by innocence and by my own youth that I have only one heart and one love to give, and no woman has ever ruled them, and never willexcept for myself. And so I'll say farewell, good madam. I'll never again try to make you pity my master's passion.
And yet, one can act against one's nature
But what does Jupiter say, I ask you?
Iago, give these letters to the captain of my ship, and tell him to extend my greetings to the senate back in Venice. Once that is done, come find me where I will be walking atop the walls.
[Singing] And what if you do?
Isn't it strange to hear such godly preaching there? Did you ever dream of such a thing?
But his actions suggests something he had already done.
What kind of guy was it that robbed you?
Oh Lord!
Forgive me, sweet father.
Then Ill call you a lowly servant.
Don't worry; you're in no danger here.
I am biting my thumb.
Go see what's going on.
All you bottom-feeders, water and steam is the perfect meal for you, and I hope you never eat a better feast than this for the rest of your lives. I, who endured all your flattery, wash myself of it and return to you your wickedness.
I'll do my best.
Whatever you say.
No, indeed, I do worry about you.
Give up? No. That's cowardly and womanish.
There's Silvia, and Silvia is mine.
Oh! There he is, and we're ruined! Deny him, swear that you don't know him, or else we're completely undone.
He doesn't and he never will.
Who? Petruchio?
Who is it that is knocking so hard? Where do you come from? What do you want?
Oh, the part of me that shared Woodstock's blood makes me long for revenge on his butchers even more than your cries of pain! But since the power to take vengeance lies in the hands of the person who's responsible (and we have no hope of getting revenge on him), we have to take it up with heaven, which, when the time comes, will make everything right again.
[Whispering] An elaborate riddle!
That Julius Caesar was a famous man. His courage aided his intelligence, and his intelligence helped him make sure that his reputation for courage outlived him. Death didn't conquer that conqueror. Now he lives on in fame, though not in life. I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham
Yes, but we had decided that he shouldn't die until you, Lord Mayor, were able to come and witness his execution. But this was prevented by the loving haste of our friends, Lovell and Ratcliffe, who went slightly against our intentions by executing him so soon. My lord, if you could have heard the traitor speakand fearfully confess his plots of treasonthen you could have told the citizens what you heard. However, as it is now, they're likely to misunderstand our methods of dealing with Hastings, and mourn his death.
who has every intention of being your son-in-law
Ha, ha! Honest men are idiots, and people who trust me are just plain stupid. I've sold all my junk. I don't have a single fake gem, ribbon, mirror, perfume, jewelry, book, ballad, knife, belt, glove, shoelace, bracelet, or ring left in my bag. They all swarmed to be the first to buy, as if my stuff were some kind of holy charm. I took note of where they kept their wallets and remembered that for later. The shepherd's son (he's not all that bright, by the way) was so impressed with the girls' song that he wouldn't budge until he learned the tune and the words. That was the best advertisement, since it sent all the others running to me to get the song for themselves. There was nothing you could do; everyone was singing this god-awful song, non-stop. While they were all lying around, I took the opportunity to pick their pockets and rifled through most of their purses. If that old man hadn't come in and raised a ruckus about the shepherd's daughter and the prince, scaring everyone away, I wouldn't have left a single penny in anyone's wallet.
Here comes a fresh flower. Never been picked, I can assure you.
He and Thomas, the Earl of Surrey, were moving from troop to troop around twilight, and cheering up the soldiers.
[Offering him the crown] Courageous Richmond, you fought well. See, I took this long-stolen crown from the dead forehead of that bloody wretch. Now let it grace your brows. Wear it, enjoy it, and do much with it.
If music feeds love and makes it stronger, then keep playing music. Give me too much of it, so much that it kills my longing for love and makes it go away. Play that part againit sounded melancholy. Oh, it sounded to me like a sweet breeze blowing over a bank of violets, stealing their scent and distributing it to everyone. That's enough now, no more music. It doesn't sound as sweet as it did before. Oh spirit of love, how restless you are! You make me want to accept everything, like the sea does, but then the next minute everything seems worthless, no matter how valuable it is. Love is like a hallucinationnothing else is so imaginative and extravagant.
Good lords, go as quickly as you can.
Sir?
Noble Sebastian, by not seizing this opportunity youre letting this chance sleepno, dieeven while you are wide awake.
Go kill yourself!
Oh, Rosaline knew that you were play-acting at love but did not actually understand what love means. But come with me, my young unreliable friend. Ill help you, because its possible that this marriage may transform your two families hatred into pure love.
My lord, great Buckingham's army
My lord, Buckingham's supportersthe Guilfordsare armed and gathering in Kent. Every hour more men flock to join the rebels, and their army grows strong.
Your servants were fighting Capulet's servants when I arrived. I drew my sword to try to stop them. Just then, the reckless Tybalt showed up with his sword drawn. He taunted me while swinging his sword through the air, which made a hissing sound. As we fought, more and more Capulets and Montagues showed up to join the battle. Finally, the Prince came and stopped the fighting.
Ha! Is that his assistant wrapped up like that? Get him, he's trying to sneak away under cover.
It echoes poignantly in the heart.
Sir, my mistress says to tell you that she's busy, and she cannot come.
Come, come, give me your hands. Let me be blessed to make a happy end to this. It would be a pity if two friends like you should be enemies.
My lords, since you last left me, I've had the sweetest sleep and the most hopeful dreams that ever entered someone's drowsy head. It seemed like the souls of those Richard had murdered came to my tent and encouraged me to victory. I promise you, my soul is very joyful now, remembering that beautiful dream. How late in the morning is it, lords?
Well, sir, I could do that, but I won't right now. You're trying to trick me so I forget about persuading you regarding Cassio. Please, let Cassio be your lieutenant again.
I fear that he will. Here comes Catesby again.
Yes, both sweet and catchy, truly.
I won't allow it.
But pearls are white. And the old saying goes that tan men are pearls in the eyes of beautiful ladies.
No, truly, sir. I wont take your money.
It appears not, based on his message. First, he sends his regards to your noble self.
I see.
The grass looks so rich and healthy! It is so green!
Only me to state his current state of affairs, and to ask you to lend him some money.
But she doesn't.
There you are, my lord, I've been look all over for you. My lord
You rebels and enemies of the peace, who curse your own weapons by turning them on your neighbors.
Good morning to my sovereign king and queen. And I'm happy to see you too, my princely peers.
Oh yes, as honest as a swarm of flies all reproducing together in the blowing wind. Oh, you weed, you are so lovely and smell so sweet that it hurts to look at you. I wish you had never been born!
You're exactly right, sir.
Leave and give us a moment.
Sir Lodovico?
No, for then she has no choice but to hate you, as you tried to buy her love with murder.
Truly, madam, he keeps the devil away as well as a man in his situation can. He's written a letter to you here. I should have given it to you this morning, but a madman's letters aren't gospel truth, so it doesn't matter too much when they're delivered.
What, bishop, is Norfolk dead?
Well, behave yourself in this new spring, lest you be cropped before your time. Whats the news from Oxford? Did they hold the jousts?
Yes, I'll grant you that.
What do you mean, sir?
He did.
The devil of drunkenness decided to give up his place to the devil of anger. One vice leads to another, and now I hate myself.
What horrible things are you imagining?
Why not, little man?
And I now make the same oath, never to marry her even if she begs me. Damn her! See how lustfully she flirts with him!
Bear with me. I am hungry for revenge, and now I'm almost sick from gorging myself upon it. Your son Edwardwho killed my son Edwardis dead. Your grandson Edward is also dead, with young York thrown in as an extra, because both your grandsons didn't equal my lost son. Your Clarencewho stabbed my son Edwardis dead. And the audience to this frantic playthe adulterer Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, and Greyhave all been smothered in early graves. Richard still lives as hell's dark spy, only allowed to remain long enough to buy souls and send them down below. But soon, soon his pitiful and well-deserved end will come. The earth gapes open, hell burns, devils roar, and saints pray that he might be quickly sent from this earth. Dear God, end his life soon, so that I may live to say, "The dog is dead!"
Yes, I'm sorry that I didn't do a thousand more. Even now I curse the dayalthough there haven't been many such days, I admitwhen I didn't do some horrible thing like kill a man (or else plot his death), rape a girl (or plot some way to do it), accuse some innocent person, swear, make two friends hate each other, break the neck of poor cattle, or set barns and hay-stacks on fire and tell the owners to put out the flames with their tears. I've often dug up dead men from their graves and set them standing up at the doors of their dear friendswho had begun to get over their griefand used my knife to write on their skins, as on the bark of trees, "Don't let your sorrow die, although I'm dead." Ha, I've done a thousand awful things as easily as one would kill a fly, and nothing makes me sadder than not being able to do ten thousand more.
Well then, just do this, noble Catesby: go and sound out Lord Hastings regarding our cause. But make it seem like a vague plan for the distant future. Find out how he feels, and summon him to the Tower tomorrow for the coronation. If he seems like he could be convinced to join us, then encourage him and explain all our reasons to him. If he's surly, cold, or unwilling, then you should act like that too, and break off the conversation. Let us know how he responds, for tomorrow we will hold two separate council meetingsone public, and one in secret, only for our supportersand you'll have lots of work to do at them.
How does she like my conversation?
But you killed my children.
Amen!
Youd be a lost monster.
Oh, no doubt it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
If only it were so! But not until I am dead. I'll say to gold that it will be rushed to before long.
First, let heaven witness my speech! I swear that I make this accusation as a devoted subject, concerned for the precious safety of my prince, and free from any other grudge or personal motive. Now, Thomas Mowbray, I turn to you, and listen closely; for what I speak, I'll prove true while I live, or my soul will answer for it in heaven. You are a traitor and a villain, too good to be so and too bad to live, since the brighter and clearer the sky, the uglier it looks when clouds fill it. Once more (the more to make my point), I throw the name of "foul traitor" back down your throat; and wishif it pleased my sovereignthat before I go, I might prove what I say with my sword.
That really was not so good. But I wish I could say that was the worst he'll do.
Let's test that. If he doesn't care about it, he'll give it to us without a care. If he covets it, how will we get it?
Right, you speak true.  He loves me just as much as Hereford does. And as they love me, I love them: that's how we got here.
Why?
Your words are so dark and threatening! Your eyes menace me. Why do you look so pale? Who sent you here? Why have you come?
Write him a letter from us. Right away, hurry now.
Oh, barbaric animals, just like you!
Then she is well, and nothing is bad. Her body sleeps in the Capulet crypt, and her immortal soul lives with the angels. I saw her buried in her familys tomb, and rushed here to tell you the news. Oh, pardon me for bringing this bad news, but you told me it was my duty to do so, sir.
I hear a noise from inside. Dear love, goodbyeJust a second, Nurse!Sweet Montague, be true. Stay for a moment. Ill come right back.
I'll give my nephew a greater gift than that.
First, I wish you all happiness in your sacred position. The next news is that I've sent the decapitated heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent to London; how I captured them is described in this paper.
Then it's more likely to be fake. Please, keep it to yourself. I heard you were rude at my gates, and I let you in because I was curious about you, not to hear your message. If you're not crazy, then go. If you're sane, be quick. I am not in the mood for lively conversation.
The captain who first brought me to shore has my woman's clothing. He has some legal charge against him, and is in prison because he's been sued by Malvolioa gentleman and a servant of my lady's.
Would you fall with the rest of the men and remain an animal?
[Whispering] Curse him, wicked Jezebel!
Oh, let me speak!
Well, then I might as well be dying of cancer and be named Judas Iscariot. My reputation is ruined. From now on, I'll stink of this. I'll walk into a room and everyone will complain about the stench. I'll be shunned and hated more than the worst epidemic in the history of the world.
Move away, here comes Lord Timon.
I haven't been home in fifteen years. I've been away for so long, but I do want to die and be buried there. Besides, the remorseful king, my former boss, has asked me to come. I might be able to ease his suffering, which is just another reason I want to go.
But your loving advances make me very unhappy.
You are firm in your resolve, then?
"And another thingyou're wasting your valuable time with that foolish knight"
Whoever works to rise in the world ought to poison himself! What do we have here? Gold? Shiny yellow gold? No, I am not a false man[He keeps digging] Where are you, roots?![Looking at the gold] Just this much gold will turn the world upside down, making black white, foul fair, wrong right, low high, old young, cowardice valor. Ha, gods! Why this little thing? What is it, even? Why does this steal from you your loyal priests and servants, and steal the pillow from beneath a man's head? This yellow fiend will make and break religions, bless the lowly, and even make the leper liked, the thief as great as a senator! This little thing makes a widow get married a second time, and rejuvenates a woman so ugly that even the grossest men plagued with sores would have rejected her.[Still digging] Come on, stupid earth, whoring around beneath the feet of different nations, I will lower myself to your level and take my revenge.
Stop, stop, I say! It is my lord, the Duke. It is I, a dishonored manthe banished Valentinewho welcomes Your Grace.
And just in time, here comes the sweating lord.
Why, what's going on, man? What is the matter with you?
If they're still alive, I should hope that I don't need to fear them.
Marshal, ask that champion why he's come here bearing arms: have him state his name and swear that his cause is just.
This show is an incredible illusion, with enchantingly harmonious music. Am I right to think that these are spirits that we're watching?
[As CAMBIO] Ridiculous ass! You are not even educated enough to know why music was created in the first place. Wasn't it to refresh the mind of man after his studies and daily labor? So let me read philosophy with her, and when I take a break, you can come in with your harmony.
Kinsmen, shoot all your arrows at the palace; well annoy the prideful emperor.
Where then can I go for help, if not to you?
I'll go back to the Duke of Gloucester and tell him so.
Northumberlandthe ladder with which Bolingbroke climbs to the throneit wont be long until things go bad between you two: if he gives you half the kingdom, you wont think its enough, since you helped give him everything. And hell be suspicious of you; since you know how to depose kings and put someone else in their place, whats to stop you from doing it again? The love of wicked men turns to fear, that fear to hate, and hate to danger and deserved death.
What is it? A spirit? Lord, its looking all around! Believe me, sir, it is very good-looking. But it must be a spirit.
No, don't say "stand up"; say "pardon" first, and "stand up" afterwards. If I were your nurse teaching you your first words, "pardon" would be the first word you knew. I never wanted to hear any word so much; say "pardon," king, and let pity teach you how: the word is short, but short is sweet, and no word is better to hear from a king.
Oh, I've been killed!
Whatever you want, enforce it with mercy and not with violence.
I think you're right, my lord.
Know, then, that it is your fault that you've given up the supreme seat, the majestic throne, the powerful office of your ancestors, your position of greatness, and the glory of your royal familyall of which are yours by birth. And instead you've handed it over to a corrupted, impure usurper. You have been lost in prayer and dreamy contemplation, but now we've come to alert you of your country's needs. Our noble island wants her true self backher face has been scarred by Edward's infamous deeds, and her royal family has been corrupted by ignoble outsiders. Its majesty is almost lost in an abyss of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion. To fix this situation, we beg your Grace to take charge and become king of this landnot Lord Protector, steward, substitute, or lowly agent to another ruler, but king, the successor of a noble bloodline. This is your right by birth, your empire, your own. It's for this purpose that I have come with these citizenswho are your devoted and loving friends, and vehemently begged me to do thisto try and convince your Grace to accept our plea.
Do your worst. This deed you have done is not justified. It is no more worthy of heaven than you were worthy of her.
What, what! The lustful sons of Tamora did this horrible, bloody crime?
No, I believe that they rise up to heaven and awaken God from his gentle, peaceful sleep.
Just because you have more cares doesnt mean I have fewer. Im sad because Ive lost my cares; youre sad because youve gained cares. I still have my cares, although Ive given them away; they go along with the crown, but still they stay with me.
This isn't a great favor you're doing me. It's as if I'm trying to persuade you to put on gloves when it's cold out, or to eat healthy food, or to keep yourself warm, or to do anything that's good for you. No, when I have something to ask of you that will really test your love, it will be a difficult, serious thing, one that you wouldn't grant easily.
A very handsome man.
Oh, Dionyza, how can someone who's starving not beg for food? Can he pretend he's not hungry until he dies? We should proclaim our grief loudly, cry out, weep, then shout even louder. Then maybe the gods will wake up from their sleep, take notice of how their creatures are suffering, and help us. I'll start by telling our sad story of the last few years, and you can help me by crying during the pauses.
My lord, I will leave now. [He starts to leave.]
Because your lordship was proclaimed a traitor. But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh, to offer his service to the Duke of Hereford, and sent me over here to Berkeley, to find out how large an army the Duke of York had raised there; then he told me to meet him in Ravenspurgh.
[To SEBASTIAN] But the visitor trying to bring comfort to the sick wont give up on him.
Ignore it, you fool. Its trash.
I promise you, sir, the pure love I feel in my heart holds back the passion I feel elsewhere.
And I'll tell you something funny. [To HORTENSIUS] Your lord sent you to get money, right?
Why, that's because you're white: your treacherous color so easily betrays what you're thinking, since you blush so easily! But this young boy has another kind of complexion. Look how the black slave smiles on his father, as if to say "old boy, I'm yours." He's your brother, lords, fed from the same blood that first gave you life, and from the womb where you were imprisoned he has emerged, too, and come to the light. No, he is your brother, certainly, although he looks like me.
There arent any bushes or shrubs here to offer me even a little protection from the weather. And another storm is coming. I can hear it in the sound of the wind. That black cloud over therethe huge onelooks like a dirty leather canteen thats about to drop the liquid it contains. If it storms like it did earlier, I dont know where Ill hide. That cloud is going to drop buckets of rain. [He sees CALIBAN] What do we have here? Is it a man or a fish? Is it dead or alive? It must be a fish. He smells like a fish, an old fish, like old cheap dried fish. What a strange fish! If I were in England now, as I was once before, and had a painting that showed this fish, every single fool there would give me a silver coin just to look at it. In England, this monster would make a man rich. But, then again, any strange beast there is just like a man. English people wont give a penny to help a lame beggar, but theyll give ten to see a dead Indian. This monster here has legs like a man but fins for arms! Hes still warm, too, by my faith. I no longer think this is a fish. I think now that its a native of the island whos been struck by a lightning bolt.
If he'd really do anything, I'd ask him to give me your girlfriend, who he clearly doesn't care for.
Bring in my daughter. Put her in a wedding dress good enough for the king of the gods himself. From the time she was conceived to the time she was born, Nature worked to make her beautiful specifically for this moment of marriage, and the whole universe decided to make her as perfect as possible.
That's me, sir.
[To BRAKENBURY] Ah, jailer, jailer, I did all those things that the ghosts accused me ofand my crimes are now giving evidence against my soul. I did them all for King Edward's sake, and now see how he thanks me.
ArielI call you with a thought. I thank you, Ariel. Come.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, please go to my lady
He would be rich in both, if justice had its way.
No? Why not? Richardwho is now my husbandfirst came to me when he'd hardly washed all the blood off his hands from killing both my first, angelic husband and my husband's fatherthat dear saint Henrywhose corpse I was tearfully following. Oh, I tell you, when I looked at Richard's face then, my only wish was this: "May you be cursed for making me a widow so young. When you get married, let sorrow haunt your bed, and may your wifeif any woman is crazy enough to marry yoube made more miserable by your life than you've made me by my dear husband's death." But alas! Before I could even repeat my curse again, my woman's heart stupidly fell prey to his honeyed words. I then proved the victim of my own soul's curse. From then on, I haven't had one hour of precious sleep in his bed without being awakened by the sounds of his nightmares. It doesn't matter, thoughRichard hates me because of my father, Warwick, who was his enemy. He'll soon get rid of me, no doubt.
The only way Ill hide is if my heartsick groans produce a mist that covers me from peoples searching eyes.
And I could sing, if crying did me any good, and you wouldn't need to cry at all.
Dont saints have lips? And pilgrims, too?
I dare say, sir, that it's almost two, and it will be dinnertime before we get there.
Why do you hope so? One had better hope he is, for he's in a hurry, and his success against the rebels requires speedso why do you hope he isn't gone yet?
Oh Lord, I could stay here all night listening to good advice like yours. Education is amazing!
First, as you know, my house in the city, which is richly furnished with gold and china, and basins and jugs for her to wash her dainty hands. My wall hangings are of purple tapestry, my ivory chests are stuffed with gold, and my cypress-wood chests are filled with quilted bedspreads, expensive clothes, bed curtains and canopies, fine linen, Turkish cushions embossed with pearl, gold Venetian draperies, pewter and brass, and everything else you could want for a house or housekeeping. Then, at my farm I have a hundred milk cows and a hundred and twenty fat oxen in my stables. Everything else I own is of a similar high value. I myself am getting on in years, I must confess, and if I should die tomorrow, all this will belong to Biancaso long as while I live she will be only mine.
Aha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward! He's not lolling about in a lustful bed, but on his knees in prayer; not enjoying himself with a few prostitutes, but praying with two learned priests; not sleeping to fatten up his lazy body, but praying to enrich his attentive soul. England would be blessed to have this virtuous prince wearing its crown. But I'm afraid he won't agree to it.
For reasons unknown to me, King Antiochus got angry at him (or at least Pericles thought so). Pericles, worried that he had offended the king, to show his remorse until he could rectify the situation, decided to sail away, despite it being dangerous on the seas.
In God's name, I'll ascend the royal throne.
A bloody deed, and desperately done. I wish I could wash my hands of this sad murder, as Pontius Pilate did.
Who is it that cried out?
May his soul rest in peace with good old Abraham in heaven! Lords, your challenges will wait until we assign a day for the duel.
And yet you aren't limping.
I say she will.And first begin with her.
And I'll followbecause I love Silvia more than I hate Eglamour, who accompanies her.
And the letters you'll get from King Leontes
In a second, Im coming!
Health to everyone!
My masters house.
Oh Kate, calm down. Please, don't be angry.
Armor? Let me see that. After all the bad luck I've had, finally, something to help me fix myself, though it is my own, and part of my heritage: this is my armor, given to me by my dead father. Just before he died he told me, "Keep it, Pericles. It's kept me safe all my life," and he pointed to this brace, "It saved me. Keep it. When you need it, though I hope the gods will protect you from such a situation, it will defend you." I've always had it with me and have always loved it. I'd never been separated from it until the storm, which doesn't spare anyone, took it in its rage. Now that it's calmed, it's given it back again. I thank you for it. I didn't lose much after all in the shipwreck, since I have my father's gift now.
The Duke of Norfolk, filled with rage, is awaiting the sound of the trumpet to summon him to battle.
With all my heart I pardon him.
Yes, though I'm also suited for one other place, if you'll let me name it.
Let it be mine, my most noble lord, only as my true service deserves your love.
Get down, whore!
Certainly. One of them looks exactly like a fish, and must therefore be marketable.
What?
I beg you, sir, have patience. You look pale and wild, as if youre about to do something reckless.
Did you really have so much time to examine the secrets of the deep while you were dying?
It is not everyone's fault that you are offended. It is not fair to avenge yourself on those that are here now for those who offended you then. Crimes should not be inherited like the land. Dear countrymen, bring in your army, but leave without your anger. Spare your hometown of Athens and those people who in your wrath you might otherwise kill. Be like a shepherd and approach the herd and separate the infected parts of it. Do not kill everyone.
Indeed, it is inconsistent. My letters say a hundred and seven ships.
You cast a spell on me. You've beaten me to the brink of tears, giving me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes, crying before these comforting words.
I do, so I can thank you for what you called me.
What? I'm contagious? Don't talk about me like I'm a basilisk; I've looked at thousands of people, and they've been fine. I've never killed anyone just by sight. Camillo, I know you're a good guy, and experienced in your job, which is as much a credit to you as a fancy last name is to royalty. I'm begging you, if you know anything that I should know, please don't keep it from me.
I understand what you are saying, but do not know how you have arrived at these conclusions.
Oh master, master, I've been watching for so long that I'm dog-tired, but at last I spied a good old fellow coming down the hill. He'll work for our needs.
Well, sir, it's half a day's journey. And, by the way, he has a beautiful daughter and tomorrow is her birthday. Princes and knights from all over the world have come to fight in a tournament for her love.
Masters, are you crazy? What's wrong with you? Have you no wit, manners, or honesty, that you're making such a racket at this time of night? Are you trying to turn my lady's house into a noisy tavern by singing these rowdy songs without bothering to lower your voices at all? Do you have no respect for people, this place, or this time of night?
The sun begins to tinge the western sky with gold. And now it's time for Silva to meet me at Friar Patrick's place. She won't be late. Lovers never miss the time they're supposed to meet upunless they arrive early if they really can't wait to see each other. Here she comes.
Why don't you care for them?
By Saint Anne, we'll have spiced ale too.
I beg you, don't get upset. Othello is just in a bad mood. State business has angered him, and he's just taking out his anger on you.
Good afternoon, beautiful lady.
Well, sure it is.
Oh, sir, I think she is more gracious than she was before. And yet, she is not so sure about your physical appearance.
Come on, dun is the color of a timid mouse. Youre being as timid as a patrolman on night duty. If youre a stick stuck in the mud, well pull you outpardon me for being rude out of the love in which youre stuck up to your ears. Come on, were wasting daylight.
Thank you very much, fellow. Here, have a drink on me.
Here, most gracious lord.
You took what I said more seriously than I meant it.
You foul, wrinkled witch, what are you doing here?
I'll take care of it.
You may do that, sir. It's a wise idea. Farewell.
[Offstage] God have mercy on us! The ships splitting apart; the ship's splitting! Goodbye, my wife and children! Goodbye, brother! The ship's splitting, splitting, splitting!
Youre not taking one step to try to fight an enemy.
She is awake, sir. If she happens to come this way, I'll tell her.
My lord, I won't leave you now: I'll ride to the sea with you.
I was born in Verona. I'm old Antonio's son. My father is dead, and his fortune is mine now. I hope to see many long, good days.
Well, what would you do if you were your master?
You might have done this without the robe and beard. He never saw you.
Nurse!
Do you think it's true?
Who's stopping you?[To MARINA] Cheer up, missy. I like your clothes.
If Iago said this, then let his malicious soul rot slowly day after day! He lies down to his heart. She was too attached to her filthy marriage to you to be unfaithful.
Its young Romeo, right?
Then you must be a weakling, because its the weak one who gets shoved up against a wall.
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.
I'm the empress, but the emperor is there.
I think the boy is charming. He blushes.
Come, come. Let's go. Do you know what, my lord? Those lords you just mentionedRivers and Greywill be beheaded today.
It's nothing but your imagination, my gracious lady.
His nurse, grandmother.
[Giving money to the FOOL] There's money from me too. If one knight gives a
Carlisle, this is my sentence. Find some secret place, some little monastery, and enjoy your life there. So long as you live in peace, die free from conflict; for though you've always been my enemy, I know you're an honorable man.
Well then, improve your fortunes through your bravery. Challenge the duke's young servant to a fight. Hurt him in eleven places. My niece will notice this, and let me assure you, no matchmaker in the world can win you a woman's love like a reputation for bravery can.
Which symbolizes that his love of beauty could as easily lead him to do great things as evil ones.
What is going on? What is the reason for this fight? Have we become Turks? Are we attacking ourselves since fate stopped the Turks from attacking us? You are Christians; stop this barbarous brawl. The next one of you to raise a fist must not value his life very much, for I'll kill whoever moves. Silence that annoying bell. It will worry everyone on the island. What is the matter, gentlemen? Honest Iago, you look sick with worry. Tell me, who started this? I command you to tell me, if you care for me.
May the gods forgive you!
Whats this? Whats this?
Think about this pact he made with King Alonso, and about what happened as a consequence of it. Then tell me if Antonio can really be thought of as a brother.
Your grace is responsible for seeing justice done.
My father had a mole on his forehead.
Give me the mirror, and Ill read from that. No deeper wrinkles yet? Has sorrow struck so many blows against my face and not left any deeper wounds? Oh, the mirror flatters me, like my old courtiers, lying to me! Was this the face that every day under his household roof kept ten thousand servants? Was this the face that, like the sun, blinded people who looked at it? Was this the face that faced so many follies, and was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke? I see a fragile glory shining in this face, and the face is fragile too.
I'm a virgin, although bad luck has landed me in this dump where, since I came people have paid more to get diseases than they would for medicine. Oh, may the gods set me free from this hellish place, even if it means changing me into a bird that flies through the pure air!
And as we walk along, I will dare to be bold with our conversationso I can make your Grace smile. [Referring to JULIA] What do you think of this boy, my lord?
She's a most beautiful lady.
Her story is blank, my lord. She never spoke of her love, but kept her passion concealed. It tormented her from the inside, like a worm trapped inside a closed flower bud, and fed on her outer beauty until it faded. She pined away quietly and sadly, and sat like a sculpture of patience itself, smiling despite her grief. Now wasn't this true love? We men might say more and promise more, but indeed our words are stronger than our passions. We are good at making vows of love, but worse at keeping them.
[To Bolingbroke] My gracious lord, I offer you my service, such as it is, being tender, raw and young: when I'm older, I'll be more worthy of it.
Yes.
I'll come and hear what reasons you have for doing this.
Lady, I swear by the sacred moon, which outlines in silver the tops of these fruit trees
I'm thankful for the day my falcon landed on your father's farm.
Well, we may meet again.
Urgent! Let's do it another time. Please, let's get ready to entertain these new guests.
And you have to take care of the funeral; bury her in the fields nearby, for you're noble gentlemen. Once you're done with that, hurry up and send the midwife to me. Once I've taken care of the midwife and the nurse, then the ladies can gossip all they want.
I have such deadly poisons. But those who sell poison receive the death penalty in Mantua.
Then think of this hard journey as a jewel box where you can set the precious stone of your return home.
Tell me, furthermore: have you asked him whether he accuses the duke because he has a grudge against him, or becauselike a good subjecthe has reason to suspect him of disloyalty?
Because I'm pretty.
[To LUCENTIO] Oh, very well, I've read the list of books for Bianca. Now listen, sir: I want them very handsomely bound, and I want them to be books of love. No matter what, don't teach her any other lessons. Do you understand me? Above and beyond what Sir Baptista pays you, I'll add on a hefty bonus. Take your book list too. And have all the books well perfumed too, for the lady they're going to is sweeter than perfume itself. What will you teach her?
Both on one horse?
And God bless you for that! I'll go to the queen. But please, come closer.
You speak well. I'd bet my life that, young as you are, you've fallen in love with a woman before. Am I right, boy?
[As LUCENTIO] But tell us, what is your old news?
Oh, it will be possible. Swear by my sword that you'll do what I say.
No.
[As LITIO] The bass string is fineit's this base villain that's out of tune.
The ugly, foolish women play the same tricks the pretty, wise ones do.
Please come to the diner, then. Will you?
[Whispering] And this will all end in an "O" as well, I hopethe "O" of a hangman's noose.
Where is everyone?
Oh! Oh! Oh!
Like standing water, I'm not moving at all.
Five judges verified it, and there were countless witnesses.
We hope you find some peace.
We're soldiers, not thieves.
"That Sir Andrew"
[Waking up and seeing them] Angels above protect the king!
No he's not.
We certainly would, then wed go hunting birds at night by luring them to us with a lantern and smacking them out of the sky with a stick.
Ah, who can stop me from wailing and weeping, cursing my bad luck, and tormenting myself? I'll ally myself with the black despair that threatens my soul, and become my own enemy.
I have no husband. Do not talk to me, Emilia. I cannot weep, and I have nothing to say besides what could be expressed by tears. Please, make my bed tonight with the sheets from my wedding night. Remember to do this, and call your husband here.
Heres a friar whos trembling, sighing, and weeping. We took this pickax and this shovel from him as he was leaving the graveyard.
Did you hear it, Gonzalo?
If I weren't a thief, I'd be getting a promotion right about now. I brought the old man and his son onboard the prince's ship. I told him what I'd heard about the bag and whatnot, but he was too busy worrying about the shepherd's daughter (as he thought she was then), who was sea-sick, and then he got sea-sick, too because of the storm. So the mystery remained unsolved. But it's all the same to me; if I'd figured out this secret, it wouldn't have matched up very well with my other crimes. [The SHEPEHERD and the SHEPHERD'S SON come in] Here come the guys I helped against my will, already decked out in their new, fancy clothes.
No, I'll slit the nose of that villain who tried to send me to jail.
To satisfy you and because of your lovely wife's invitation.
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] Poor Clarence abandoned his father-in-law Warwick, yes, and broke his own oathmay Jesus pardon him!
Oh, its awful, awful. I thought the clouds spoke to me; the winds sang to me; and the thunder roared like the deep and terrible sound of an organall of them said the name of Prospero. Singing in a deep note, the voice spoke of the bad things I've done, and told me that, because of what I did, my son now sleeps on the ocean floor. Now I'll go search for him deeper than an anchor has ever sank, and lie with him in the mud.
I'll take you up on that promise, your Grace.
I think such a story would win over my daughter, too. Good Brabantio, try to make the best of a bad situation. As they say, a broken weapon is better than none at all.
Think what, Iago?
Oh, sir, she has no doubt of that.
If I don't hate him, you can hate me. Three noblemen of the city tipped their hats to him, making a personal plea for him to make me his lieutenant. And, truly, I know my value, and I'm worthy of that position. But of course Othello is too proud to listen and wants to do things his own way, so he speaks in circles with empty talk about war-related titles. And in the end he declines their proposal and says, "Certainly, I have already chosen my lieutenant." And who did he choose? A guy who's basically a mathematician, some Michael Cassio, from Florence. A man practically cursed with a wife too beautiful (whom he can't control). A man who has never commanded a squadron on the battlefield, who knows no more about battle than an old lady. He knows only theory from books, full of the talk of old geezers in togas. His military experience is all ideas, with no real action! But, sir, Othello chose this Cassio for lieutenant, not meeven though he's seen proof of my military prowess with his own eyes at Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on all sorts of battlefields in Christian and Pagan lands. Now, my career's stalled and I'm overtaken by some number cruncheran accountant! That bean-counter will be his lieutenant before too long, and meanwhile I'll be carrying around his Moorship's flag, thank you very much.
She has become a jealous woman, a jealous woman!
[To FERDINAND and MIRANDA] Give me your hands. May grief and sorrow always grip the heart of anyone who does not wish you joy.
I can see this has upset you a little.
Let me stay and comfort you, master.
Well, there's nothing I can do. That's the price of military service. Promotions are a matter of favoritismbased on whoever the leader likesnot based on rank, with a second officer stepping up to become a first officer, and so on. So now , sir, you be the judge and tell me: do I have any reason at all to love that Moor?
[Waking up] The strangeness of your story made me drowsy.
My mother had a maid named Barbary. She was in love, and the man she loved turned out to be crazy and abandoned her. She had a song called "Willow," an old song that expressed what she had experienced, and she died singing it. I can't stop thinking of that song tonight. I almost can't help but droop my head and sing it just like poor Barbary. Please, hurry.
Oh, princely Buckingham, I'll kiss your hand as a sign of my support and friendship. May only good things come to you and your noble family! Your clothes are not stained with my family's blood, and so you don't fall under my curse.
Don't worry, sir, you don't need to worry about being my husband. Indeed, marriage doesn't appeal to my heart. But even if it did, the only thing I'd want to do with you is knock you on the head with a three-legged stool, scratch up your face, and make you my fool.
Enough, whore! Do you dare to weep for him in front of me?
Yes, and even more so. But I was born at that high social rank. My family lives like eagles at the top of the tallest cedar tree, playing in the wind and looking fearlessly at the sun.
Come on, let's go to the castle. I have good news, friends! The war is over, and the Turks are all drowned. How is my old friend on this island doing? [To DESDEMONA] Honey, you will be well loved in Cyprus. They've shown nothing but love to me. Oh, my sweet lady, I keep on chattering on and going on and on about my happiness. [To IAGO] Iago, if you don't mind, go to the bay and unload my chests from the ship. Bring the ship captain to the castle. He's a good man, and his virtue demands respect. [To DESDEMONA] Come with me Desdemona.  One more time: it's so nice to see you at Cyprus.
Your assistant keeps ignoring me, and now I've been told to speak only to you.
If we could hear with our noses, his plague-breath would be sweet indeed. But will we make the sky dance with our antics? Will we wake up the night owl and sing loud enough to make people pray? Will we?
He's run off, and his wife has been killed.
What did you say, uncle?
How and why did you come here? The orchard walls are high and difficult to climb. And it will mean your death, because of who you are, if any of my family members find you here.
Well, I saw your niece Olivia treating the Duke's messenger better than she has ever treated me. I saw it in the garden.
We know your orders, Brakenbury. And we'll obey.
[To SAMPSON so that only he can hear] Say better. One of our masters kinsmen has just arrived.
They are welcome.
May fortune and victory be yours!
[To RICHARD] I was, but banishment is more painful to me than dying here at home. You owe me a husband and a son.
She's hugging him.
Miranda. Oh, Father, Ive broken your command to me by telling him that!
Ah, don't change them yet.
She's a noble lady.
A woman, and your aunt, great king: it's me. Speak with me, take pity on me, open the door. I'm a beggar that's never begged before.
But to not give up, and murder me, is beastly, savage, and devilish.
So they are. It's too bad that this is how it isbeauty starts to die just as it reaches its perfection!
Yes, sir, and he deserves it. He rules with peace and good government.
How did you sleep, my lord?
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
Obviously that was when, after three long, bitter months, I convinced you to give me your hand in marriage. At that moment, you said, "I am yours forever."
Madam, Duke Orsino's young gentleman has returned. I had to beg him to come back, but he is here now and ready to see you when you're ready.
Taste it first, as you always do.
Now, before God, it is a shame that he, a royal prince, is wronged in this way, as are so many more of noble blood in this declining land. The king is not himself, but directed by flatterers; and they will tell him lies about us to make him enemies to us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
If you do want to fight, sir, then Im up for it. My master is as good as yours.
What? You're a king's daughter named Marina?
No, master, in whom doubt and suspicion have taken hold too late. You should have feared lies when you threw feasts with your wealth, but your suspicion comes when you are most poor. What I show you is true love, duty, and enthusiasm for your outstanding mind, along with care for your wellbeing. Believe me, my lord, that any advantage I could gain now I would exchange for one wish: that you had the power and wealth to make yourself rich. That would be the return for my admiration.
[To himself] Its working![To FERDINAND] Come on.[To himself] Youve done well, Ariel.[To FERDINAND] Follow me.[To ARIEL] Listen to what else you should do for me.
Yes, my good lord. Everyone here in the king's presence has gone totally pale.
Dont tell me that. When the wine barrel is empty, well drink water. But we won't drink even a drop of water before then. Therefore, raise the bottle and drink. [To CALIBAN] Servant-monster, drink a toast to me.
Spoken like a brave man who values his reputation. Come, shall we get to work?
Where is he?
You won't win any more money from me with this third roll of the dice. But if you'll tell your lady that I'm here to speak with her, and bring her along with you when you return, then you might wake up my generosity.
Oh, Paulina, you know I'd do anything for you. But I came to see the statue of my queen. But I've passed through your entire gallerywhich was great, and allwithout my daughter seeing the statue of her mother that she came to see.
Then you lie: look at your last poem, in which you pretended that you think Timon is a worthy man.
Bring us to the cave. We promised the Athenians we would speak to Timon.
Oh, deadly sin! Oh, you rude, unthankful child! Your crime is punishable by death, but the Prince in his kindness defended you, and bypassed the law by replacing death with banishment. This is mercy, but you cant see it.
And I can cut the meat to go with your capers.
[As LUCENTIO] Of all the craziest pairings, I've never seen one like this.
A happy story, or a sad story?
Most likely, sir.
No, we wont play a sad song. Now is not the time for it.
What in the world?
What, so you think the king will be deposed, then?
Where is this impulsive and most unfortunate man?
Not so, sir, I do care for something. But honestly, sir, I don't care for you. If that means that I care for nothing, sir, then you should become invisible right nowas you're nothing.
I know that trumpet! It's the Moor.
Hey! Stop right there!
I have a tree that grows around here that I need to cut down, and I need to do that soon. Tell my friends in Athens of all stations that whoever wants to stop these pains should hurry here before my my axe touches the tree, so that they might hang themselves. Please, send those regards.
I may?
And why's that, sir?
What should I say to her? Her father's brother wants to be her husband? Or should I say it's her uncle? Or should I say it's the man who killed her brothers and uncles? Under what name should I go wooing on your behalf? What name can please God, the law, and my honor, and also seem appealing to such a young woman?
Whose house?
Your highness? We just got news that the messengers you sent to Delphos are almost back. Cleomenes and Dion just got to the shore and are on their way to court.
[As CAMBIO] Are you so strict, sir? Well, I guess I have to wait then.
Joy has the same effect on our eyes, and suddenly tears spring up from them like a baby.
She can have all this at her father's house.
Oh, something that I would hide from the eye of heaventhe shame of our empress and the disgrace of noble Rome! She is delivered, lords; she's delivered.
A daughter. She's beautiful, healthy, and will probably live. The queen takes a lot of comfort from the baby. She keeps saying, "My poor prisoner, I am as innocent as you."
[To CALIBAN] You vicious slave, fathered by the devil himself with your wicked mother, come here!
Do you know how to catch fish?
He's taxed the common people so much that he has quite lost their love; he's fined the nobles too, for old quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
Have I, Malvolio? No.
Just the prostitute we were talking about. And she's wearing perfume. Why are you following me around like this?
Do they call this place Barkloughly castle?
I'll see you hanged on Sunday first!
The most powerful queen, Great Juno, comes. I know her by her walk.
Madam, I'll happily accept your offer. [To VIOLA] Your master releases you from his service. Because you served me so well, doing things that no woman, especially one of your noble birth, should be expected to do, and because you called me "master" for so long, I will offer you my hand in marriage. From now on you'll be your master's mistress.
Tomorrow, then. We will wait on your Grace. And now we joyfully bid you farewell.
She returns this ring to you, sir. You might have saved me the trouble and taken it with you. She also adds that you should make it clear to your lord that there is no hopeshe wants nothing to do with him. And one thing more: you should never return here as Orsino's messenger again, unless it is to report how he takes the bad news. Take the ring now.
What do you think it's worth?
No, good Sir Toby.
Cornelia the midwife, me, and no one else but the empress.
I've changed my mind.
[Whispering] This is winning him over, heart and all.
Hell torture me to death.
Perdita, do you feel the same way about him?
Yes, sir, it's too true, God help us.
Oh come on! You're just saying that.
Isn't she pretty?
That'll be the worse for me, and an end to the matter.
They sit talking by the fire in the parlor.
I assure you, father, it's true.
Next hell say but
A painting, which I'm begging you to accept as a gift from me.
[As LITIO] Madam, my instrument's in tune.
The moment Fortune changes her mind and spurns this newly chosen man, all of those who depended on him and who helped him on their hands and knees to reach the mountain top, they let him slip without even trying to save him.
Yes, indeed they are, sir.
It's useless.
Begs her to do what God, the King of Kings, forbidsmarriage between an uncle and a niece.
Northumberland returns with a message from Bolingbroke.
Ill confess to you that I love him.
It's off-the-cuff. It comes from my natural intelligence.
I should be wise, because being honest is foolish and causes someone to lose all that he works for.
Who is he, Biondello?
It's a good thing I was found by you. I'll just go say one thing inside, and then I'll go with you.
Leave you! Why?
I wouldn't tell him, not if you gave me this beautiful island in return. I love Cassio, and would do anything to cure him of his alcoholism
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] Oh, Aunt, you didn't weep for our father's death. So why would we help you with our tears?
I would, sir, if I were human.
Hey, come bring the nets in!
Here's more material for our comedy.
That, being mad herself, she has now married a madman.
Tut, tut! Don't "grace" me or "uncle" me: I am no traitor's uncle; and the word "grace" in an ungracious mouth is just profanity. Why have those banished and forbidden feet dared once to touch a dust of England's ground? But then more "why?" Why have they dared to march so many miles upon this peaceful land, frightening her pale-faced villages with war and display of arms? Do you come because the anointed king isn't here? Why, foolish boy, the king is here; he appointed me his representative. If only I were the young lord I was when brave Gaunt, your father, and myself rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men, from many thousand French soldiers, oh, then how quickly should my hand (now prisoner to the palsy) punish you for your offence!
[To himself] Everything is happening, I see, just as my soul hoped it would. [To ARIEL] Spirit, you wonderful spirit, Ill set you free in two days for doing your work so well.
Captain Alcibiades, you seem to long for battle now.
Well, what do you know, old boy, you've done it.
Will he woo her? Yes, or I'll hang her.
No, thats wrongits night.
[To SECOND SERVINGMAN] Go hire twenty skilled cooks.
I'm well, my sovereign lordfor that's what I must call you now.
Yes, but this case at least can be mended.
Tell them to go away! We won't have it. There's been enough shenanigans here already.[To POLIXENES] Sir, I know you're getting tired of us.
We thank your Honor.
I will not be quiet. What is the matter, Aumerle?
Here comes my son Aumerle.
Not one person that I care about more than myself. Youre a kings advisor. If you can order the storm to stop, or negotiate a peace with it, we sailors will all stop working with our ropes and take a rest. Use your authority and do it. If you cant, be thankful that youve lived as long as you have, and go to your cabin and prepare yourself to face death, should the worst happen. [To SAILORS] Work, my boys! [To GONZALO] Now, Im telling you, get out of our way.
"You must give up your drinking."
If you had suffered for him in childbirth as I have, you would be more sympathetic. But now I see: you suspect that Ive been disloyal to your bed, and that hes a bastard, not your son. Sweet York, sweet husband, dont think that: he looks as much like you as any man could, not like me or my family, and yet I love him.
Apemantus, you (and your humor) are welcome here.
I stand before you virtuous men to ask a favor. The law is a merciful thing, which only a tyrant could use for cruel purposes. Time and hard luck have worked against a friend of mine who recently broke the law in a fit of rage, a state which unfortunately the law does not consider when men break it. My friend, this action aside, is a good man, who in the moment actually acted without cowardicesomething which ought to be held against his crimeby bravely identifying and responding to one who had ruined his reputation. He opposed this enemy with a clearheaded and calculating passion, expressing his anger with a certain coldness, almost as if he were proving a point.
Wait a moment! I will not read your master's lines. I know they are full of declarations of love and recently-invented oathswhich he will break as easily as I tear his letter apart.
Tell me who your parents were. I think you said you'd been wronged and hurt in the past, and that you thought you had suffered as much as I had (if the stories were both told).
We'll show you one of Io as a maid, just as Jupiter tricks and surprises her. The painting seems alive, it's so realistic.
And living too; for now his son is duke.
Welcome, you jackass. Now sing us a song.
My gracious sovereign.
"Naught" to do with Miss Shore? I tell you, fellow, there's only one man who can do "naught" with her. And if anyone else is doing it, he'd best do it secretly.
Oh, grace! Oh, heaven forgive me! Are you human? Do you have any sense, or a soul? Goodbye, I resign as flag-bearer. Oh what a fool I am for being honest to a fault! Oh this monstrous world! Take note, take note, everyone: it is not safe to be direct and honest. Thank you for teaching me this lesson. From here on out, I'll love no friend, since showing love for your friends causes such hate.
I've been beaten and robbed. My money and clothes were stolen, and then they threw these rags on me.
You are captivated by some task, writing a poetic dedication to Lord Timon.
For this favor to our mother, we're very grateful to you.
Our horses!
Dont you hear me speaking?
I'm here in Sicily by his command. He's asked me to greet you not just as a king, but as a friend and brother. Though he wanted to come, he was held back by some unavoidable issues at home. He asked me to tell you that he loves you more than all the thrones and all the kings in the world.
Indeed, Im sorry youre in pain. Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what does my love say?
Do you know what you're saying?
[As LUCENTIO] Can you at least stay until after dinner?
Please, don't spin me around. My stomachs not feeling well.
Yes, but I know
But my noble lord, if she is really as brokenhearted as they say, she is sure to deny me an audience.
Here come our fellow Senators.
Go on, my loving lord.
So they say. But how weird is thishave you ever seen anything like it? Look at how amazing wealth and generosity are, how they can summon all these people to attend to them. I know this merchant.
Im glad! This is good. Stand up.
But only in title, not in income.
My lord has fallen into a seizure. This is the second time he's had one of these fits. He had one yesterday.
Oh awful time!
With her, on her, however you want to say it.
"What rank are your parents?" "I was born to a higher rank than I have now, but I'm still well-off. I am a gentleman." Yes, I'll swear that you are; your words, your face, your body, your actions, and your spirit all seem like a coat of arms for a lord. But not so fast! Calm down, calm down! If only Orsino were Cesario. But what's going on? Can someone catch the plague of love this quickly? I think I can feel this youth's perfection creeping stealthily and invisibly in through my eyes. Well, let it happen. [Calling out to MALVOLIO] Come, Malvolio!
Let them both set down their helmets and their spears, return back to their chairs again, and come inside with us. And sound the trumpets while we tell the dukes what we've decided.
What do you believe?
I learned it in England, where they really are strong drinkers. The Danes, the Germans, and the pot-bellied Dutchdrink, everybody!can't compare to the English in drinking.
The story is too long to repeat, but the short version is that he lost his beloved daughter and his wife.
Indeed, I'm not sorry to hear that news, for they have always been my enemies. But as for the idea that I'd support Richard's side in keeping my master's true heirs from the throneGod knows I'll never do it. I'd rather die.
Calm down, sirs. If you're gentleman, then be polite and hear me out. Baptista is a noble gentlemanone who knows my fatherand even if his daughter was more beautiful than she already is, she would still be entitled to more than one suitorand I will be one of them. Helen of Troy had a thousand suitors, so let fair Bianca have one more. And so she does. Lucentio will woo her, even if Paris himself should come to try and win her.
And you want me to do that!
Its wrong to make me wait. Ill dive into the burning lake in the underworld, and pull her out of Acheron by the heels. Marcus, were just shrubs, not cedars, not big-boned men like the cyclops. Were just metal and steel, Marcus, and yet weve had more wrongs done to us than our backs can bear. And, since theres no justice in earth or hell, well pray to heaven and move the gods to send down Justice to right our wrongs. Come, lets do it. You are a good archer, Marcus.
Turio, move back, or else accept your death. Don't come close to the range of my anger. Do not call Silvia yours. If you do that once more, Verona won't protect you. Here she is. Go ahead, try to only touch her and take her as your own; I dare you to do so much as breathe on my love.
By Saint Paul, tonight shadows have struck more terror in my soul than ten thousand soldiers could, even if they were dressed in impenetrable armor and led by that fool Richmond. It's not yet daytime. Come with me; I'll eavesdrop under our tents to see if anyone plans to desert me.
Yes, of course, sir.
Someone once adored me, too.
I shall accept them, and let the rest of those present be well entertained.
Go kill yourself you monster!
and with that shame, may your father's grief die as well!
Cousin, there's a rift now between my husband and him. But you can mend it.
Sir, I came to ask you to listen to me as your loyal servant, your doctor, your obedient advisor. I came because I'm bold enough (unlike your other servants, doctors, and advisors) to call you out on your evil actions. I come on behalf of your good queen.
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, say goodbye: he's banished six years, and he shall go.
Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon. Make it Thursday. Tell her that on Thursday shell be married to this noble earl. Will you be ready, Paris? Are you opposed to rushing in this way? We wont have a big party, and just invite a friend or two. Because Tybalt was just killed, people might think that we didnt care enough about our cousin if celebrate too much. Therefore well invite just a half dozen friends to the wedding, and no more. So, what do you say to Thursday?
Right.
To avoid marrying Paris Id jump from the top of a tower; or walk down thief-infested alleys; or sit among a nest of serpents; or be chained up with wild bears; or be shut up every night in a crypt full of rattling bones, stinking flesh, and skulls without jawbones; or climb into a freshly dug grave and hide beneath the shroud of a dead man. All those things make me tremble when I hear them said, but Ill do them without fear or dread in order to be a pure wife to my sweet love.
Meaning make a curtsy?
If you hang all the husbands who can't keep their wives quiet, you won't have any subjects left.
Come, Montague. Youre up early to see your son and heir killed at too young an age.
[Singing]Ill never again go to sea, to sea,Ill die here on the shoreThis is a terrible song to sing at a mans funeral. Well, heres something to give me a bit of comfort. [He lifts a bottle of alcohol to his mouth, drinks, and sings again]The master, the deck-cleaner, the boatswain, and I,The gunman and his crewmate,All loved Molly, Meg, Marian, and MargeryBut none of us much liked Kate,Because she spoke so cruelly,And would shout to sailors, Go hang!She did not like the smell of tar or pitch,But would sleep with a tailor when she was in the mood.So go to sea, boys, and let her go to hang!Thats a wretched song too. But heres my comfort. [He drinks]
No; I swear on my life. There was nothing to know. You'll regret this when you come to your sensesyou'll regret the things you've said about me! Sweetheart, you can almost totally fix this now if you admit you made a mistake.
How good are you at the fast dances, knight?
Don't preach about kindness or shame to me.
Good night. Go to bed and get your rest. You'll need it.
But, my good lord, your Graces' words are just as trustworthy as if I had seen him and heard him myself. And don't worry, you noble princes. I'll tell our citizens about how fairly you dealt with this case.
Does she consider my possessions?
Girls who marry that young grow up too quickly. All of my other children are dead and buried in the earth, so all hopes on this earth rest in her. But you may woo her, kind Paris. Win her love. My permission for you to marry her is only part of the bargain; she must also agree to marry you. Then my blessing on the marriage will confirm her choice. This very night Im throwing a party that Ive hosted for many years. Ive invited many guests, many close friends. Id like to invite you as a most welcome guest. At my humble home tonight, youll see see young women like stars that walk the earth and light the sky from below. Like all lusty young men, youll be delighted by the young women who are as fresh as spring flowers. Look at them all, and choose whichever woman you like best. Amidst all these girls, you may no longer think that my daughters the most beautiful. Come with me.
How is the prince?
As by definition most unbelievable things are.
Help, my lord of Norfolk, help, help! The king has performed more wonders than seems humanly possible, facing down every dangerous enemy himself. His horse is killed, and now he's fighting on foot, searching for Richmond even in the face of death. Help, honorable lord, or else the battle is lost!
Oh, woe is me! My heart is about to break!
Let it be so. Good night to everyone. [To BRABANTIO] And, noble sir, if virtue is a beautiful thing, then your son-in-law is much more fair than he is black.
Give me a second. Please wait a bit and I'll be with you as soon as I can.
Read it.
Thats true; you were there, and can testify that what I say is true.
Down, down I come, like glittering Phaethon, unable to manage his unruly horses. In the lower courtyard? Lower courtyard, where kings are made low, coming when a traitor calls and acting respectful to him. In the lower courtyard? Come down? Down, court! Down, king! For it's night when it should be day.
But he won't beg his son to stop the attack.
You're annoying me. I'm not in the mood.
Why then, the mustard without the beef.
Mistress, your father asks that you leave your books and help decorate your sister's room. You know tomorrow is the wedding day.
I'm afraid that no matter what you do, sir, your wife won't let herself be asked for anything.
For the love of God, be quiet!
How is your master Timon? He's so honest and generous.
By God, you whore! Is black so terrible a color?[To the baby] Sweetheart, you are a beautiful flower, you are.
You're really provoking me? Then lets fight, boy!
I say a husband.
I have toprinces are as vain as the gods. Just like jewels lose their shine if they're not polished, princes lose their reputations if they're not respected. Now, daughter, it's your job to explain what each knight's emblem means.
Besides, the king's enemies hate us because he loves us.
Yours, if we're telling tall tales of tails. Farewell then.
No, don't pause. For I did kill King Henrythough your beauty provoked me to do it. Now go ahead. I was the one who stabbed young Edwardthough your heavenly face that drove me to it.
We would like nothing more.
Don't argue, sir. We gentlemen don't get jealous of others with our eyes or our hearts. We neither envy the powerful nor hate the weak.
I do not worry about your insults. You are an Athenian and therefore welcome. I myself would have no power to silence you, so please, just let my food keep you quiet.
Tricks? I hate tricks. There's a man at the gate.
It's hard to see him like this! He got sick when he realized his mother is disgraced. He took it hard, as if her shame were his own personal burden. He stopped smiling, eating, and sleeping and then became bedridden. Leave me alone; go see how he's doing. [The SERVANT leaves][To himself] Shame on you! Don't think about Polixenesyou can't take revenge on him now without putting yourself in danger. He's too powerful; he has too many friends and allies. Leave him alone until the right moment. Right now, just take your revenge on Hermione. Camillo and Polixenes are laughing at me; my suffering is a huge joke to them. They wouldn't be laughing if I could get to themand she definitely won't, since she's within my power.
Bring them in; I'm ready. Since this whole thing is in honor of her birthday, my beautiful daughter, whom Nature made for men to see, will sit here, where everyone can marvel at her.
Is this the madman?
Not as much as I value telling the truth, which doesn't cost a penny.
Oh, don't promise! Keep a little faithyour faith in meeven though you're so afraid.
Yes, madam, I was born and raised less than three hours' travel from here.
What does my niece Lavinia mean by this sign language?
I would cry, madam, if it would do you good.
Too light for a bumpkin like you to catchand yet just as heavy as I should be.
Northumberland, tell him that the king says this: his noble cousin is very welcome here, and all his fair demands will be accepted without contradiction. Say this to him as graciously as you can.
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day. First we were sad because we feared you wouldn't come, but now we're sadder to see that you've come so unprepared. For God's sake, take off this costume. It's a disgrace to your social rank and an eyesore in the middle of our solemn ceremony.
Can God be so cruel?
You do yourselves much wrong and undervalue yourselves too much. Here, my lord, a small sign of my love.
Dionyza, should we sit down here and tell each other sad stories? Maybe that way we'll forget our own sad lives.
You mock me, madam. This is not the way to win your daughter.
Excuse me?
March on, march on, since we're already prepared for battle. Even if we don't have to fight foreign enemies, we'll still beat down these rebels here at home.
Yes, Mother, but I wish it weren't so.
[As CAMBIO] Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
Now, Camillo: I've been so caught up with all this that I've been rude.
Norfolk, throw down, we command you; there's no point refusing.
Indeed, I'm as bad as can be.
Sir Toby Belch! How are you, Sir Toby Belch?
I'll go now. At around three or four o'clock you should expect the news from the town hall.
Rest assured, good Cassio,  I will do all I can for you.
Look, he's coming!
Yes, it is Emilia. [To EMILIA]  One minute. [To himself] She's dead. Emilia is likely coming to tell me about Cassio's death.  There was a lot of noise outside. Ha! Not moving anymore, Desdemona? Still as the grave. Should Emilia come in here? Would that be good? Is Desdemona moving again? No. What should I do? If she comes in, she'll definitely want to speak to my wife. My wife! My wife! What wife? I have no wife. Oh, this is unbearable! Oh, what a terrible time! I think there should be a huge eclipse now of both the sun and the moon, and the ground itself should break open at what has happened.
We see the shipwreck that will come to us; there's no avoiding the danger now, for we will suffer the same.
Tell me your idea first.
He almost makes me want to give up my profession by talking me into it.
Our fight will decide who goes to heaven.
Maybe the letter upset him. I think they've ordered him to return home and leave Cassio in charge here.
Then tell the Lord Aumerle to look me in the face.
Oh slow-winged turtledove, will you let a buzzard catch you?
No, hold on. We have to let the fit run its course. Otherwise he'll foam at the mouth and break out in a fit of savage madness. Look, he's moving. Stay away for a bit. He'll recover soon. When he is gone, I would really like to talk to you in private.
It was flirtation, the sort of thing that leads to foul thoughts and lust. Their faces were so close to each other that they almost breathed the same breath. It's horrible to think about, Roderigo! When this kind of behavior happens, the main event isn't far awaythe physical consummation. Psh! But, sir, let me tell you what to do. I've brought you here from Venice. Wait for my command tonight. Cassio doesn't know who you are. I won't be far away from you. Find some excuse to make Cassio angry, either by speaking too loudly, or mocking his discipline, or whatever way you want that seems like a good idea at the time.
Read the indictment.
Come on, the gods have blessed you.
What, captain?
Yes, sir?
It is, my lord.
Welcome, my lord! How far away is your army?
I can, sir. But first, let's go into my house, where I can show you everything we found with her. We'll explain how she came here to the temple, and we won't leave anything out.
Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself. If she and I are happy, then what's it to you? When we were alone, we agreed that she would go on being a shrew in public. I tell you, it's incredible how much she loves me, though. Oh, the kindest Kate! She threw her arms around my neck, giving me kiss after kiss and swearing vows of love, and in an instant she had won my heart. Oh, you are all just beginners! It's amazing to seeeven a cowardly wretch can tame the fiercest shrew when a man and a woman are left alone together.Give me your hand, Kate. I'll now go to Venice to buy clothes for the wedding. You plan the feast, father, and invite the guests. I'll make sure my Katherine will be beautifully dressed.
What a happy coincidence, and even happier for your son. I can now call you "father" legally, and not just as a term of respect for your age. This gentlewoman here is my wife, and her sister is now married to your son. Don't be amazed or upset. His wife has a good reputation, a wealthy dowry, and a noble bloodline. She has all the qualities that would make her a worthy spouse for any noble gentleman. Now let me embrace you, Vincentio, and then we'll go out of our way to see your honest son. He'll be overjoyed at your coming.
I'll test that out.
May all the sicknesses that grow in swamps, marshes, and wetlands strike Prospero so that, little by little, he becomes nothing more than a disease! His spirits are spying on me, but I just have to curse him. Unless he tells the spirits to, they wont pinch me; frighten me by appearing as hedgehog-shaped goblins; push me in the mud; or lead me the wrong way like a false guide in the night. But he does send them after me for every little thing I do. Sometimes his spirits come after me in the form of apes, chattering and making faces at me and then biting me. Sometimes they come in the shape of porcupines, lying curled up on the paths where I walk barefoot and pricking me when I step down. Sometimes poisonous snakes wrap around me, hissing with their forked tongues until I go crazy.
Are you good at such trifles, knight?
By heaven, that's my handkerchief!
If this were being acted out on a stage, I would complain that it was unrealistic.
The only way to deal with him is gently, gently. The demon in him is rough, but we can't treat it roughly.
I think it is my Lord of Berkeley.
[To herself] And when he makes those advances to you, Silvia, it makes me unhappy.
[To himself] I'm not sure how this will get in the way of Florizel's departure.
Your speech is useless.
Whats with all the noise?
Miss Bianca, may you be blessed with all the good fortune you deserve! No, I've caught you napping, my dear. Both Hortensio and I have rejected you.
I saw you at Duke Orsino's recently.
You're talking about Timon? He is my friend and a good guy.
Way too much. It seems your master is more brazen even than mine, otherwise mine would have asked for as much.
Sir, we have a chest ready, waterproofed and sealed.
He moved quickly and lightly, so he outran us. But Moyses and Valerius are following him. Go with her to the west end of the forestthat's where our captain is. We'll follow the one who ran away. The bushes surround him; he can't escape.
Ah, madam, it's too true. And what's worse, the Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy, and the Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby, with all their powerful friends, have gone to fight with them.
Good night, queen of the Amazons.
Cassio, my lord? No, surely not. I can't imagine he would slink away looking so guilty after seeing you coming.
Please, come inside. I will give you a chance to talk to her freely.
If I had a pair of these coins, sir, do you think they'd have children?
Hello! How much for a dozen virginities?
Go and write it down, in fierce handwriting. Be rude and brief. It doesn't need to be witty, as long as it's eloquent and original. Taunt him with all the possibilities of writing. Refer to him familiarly three times at least, which will insult his pride as a nobleman. As many lies as you can fit on a piece of papereven if the paper's as big as a royal bedwrite 'em all down. Go, get started now. Even if you're using an ordinary pen, you can still fill it with bitter, venomous ink. Now go ahead.
He's a stupid, blockheaded, flap-eared son of a bitch!Come, Kate, sit down. I know you must be hungry. Will you say grace, sweet Kate, or should I?What's this? Mutton?
Or should I?
My lord, you are too kind.
By God, Here come the Capulets.
Nurse, will you come with me to my room and help me pick out the clothes and jewelry that I should wear tomorrow?
Oh you sweet little king-killer, which can set even a son and father at odds! You that can defile the bed of Hymen like Mars! You forever young, fresh, beloved, and delicate wooer, that can ruin the chastity of Diana with just a blush! You beautiful god, which can sew together impossible events and make them kiss! That can speak in every language and for any purpose! You tester of hearts, that think your slave man rebels against you and, with your power, set him at odds with himself so that beasts may rule the world!
Indeed. God forbid! I know my words may not be welcome, but I must speak the truth. Who among us is noble enough to judge our king? If there were such a person, he would know not to commit such a foul crime. What subject can pass sentence on his king? And who sits here that is not Richards subject? We dont judge thieves without hearing what they have to say, even if they look guilty: so will the symbol of God's majesty, His captain, steward, and deputy-elect, who was anointed and crowned by Him and reigned over us many yearswill he be judged by subjects, and without his even being present? Oh, God forbid that in a Christian climate refined souls should be guilty of such a terrible deed! I speak to subjects, and I speak as a subject, inspired by God to advocate for whats right: my Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king, is a foul traitor to the true king. And if you crown him, let me warn you: the blood of the English will water the ground, and our future children will suffer: well have nothing but war, never peace, as families turn against each other; horror and civil war will come to live in this land, which will be called the field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls. Oh, if you pit families against each other, it will be the saddest war that ever struck this earth. Prevent it, resist it, let this not happenor your children and your childrens children will blame you for their suffering.
This is what you get from whoring around. Please, Emilia, go ask Cassio where he had dinner tonight. [To BIANCA] Why do you shake with worry at that?
What is your will, sir, that you sent for me?
I don't eat what I hate.
Gold is useless here.
I said that without written records, fame lives long.
Call up Desdemona's father.  Wake him up. We'll slander Othello in the streets, and ruin his happiness by getting his wife's family all riled up. And even if he's in a paradise right now, we'll fill it with flies. He may still be happy, but we'll douse him in so much irritation that his happiness will lose some of its luster.
What crime do you accuse Mowbray of, cousin? It must be very bad, if it can cause us to think any ill of him.
Let me reveal myself. I am not Litio, and not a musician either. I refuse to continue with this disguise for the sake of a woman who would choose a low-class scoundrel over a gentleman like me. Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.
Good Michael, take care of the guard duties tonight. Let's show some self-restraint and not celebrate to the point of excess.
I just want to get paid!
If I described this back in Naples, would they believe me? Would they believe it if I told them that I saw native islanders such as thesebecause they must certainly be natives of the islandwho despite their unnatural shape have more grace and better manners than you can find among manyactually, almost anyhuman beings?
Yes, if your memories of yourself only hurt you.
My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine, lord of my life, commander of my thoughts: calm yourself. Remember that Titus is old; his grief for his sons has pierced him deeply and scarred his heart. Comfort him in his distress instead of prosecuting the greatest or least member of his family for this.  [To herself] Well, it's clever to pretend to defend him like this. But Titus, I've got you, and I've spilled your life-blood. if Aaron's plan goes smoothly, then we're almost there.
Are you a woman?
I know a lady in Venice who would have walked barefoot to Palestine just to touch his lower lip.
Sister, let yourself be comforted. All of us have reason to mourn the dimming of the king, our shining star, but none of us can help anything by wailing.
Yes, him.
Just stop there, and go to hell! Do you think I'm so crazy and confused that I would make this up? Do you think I would destroy my own reputation and my marriage, just to welcome all the pain and difficulty that will come of that? Do you really think I would just bastardize my son (who I think is mine and who I love as my own) without a good reason? Would I do that? Would any man have the guts to do that?
Before the time of our deal is up? Stop right there!
Have you seen my hat?
But sir, you would have given the entire world in one breath. Your holdings shrank so quickly!
Camillo, if, in your duties as a servant to the king, you ever happen to visit Bohemia (as I'm visiting Sicily now), you'll see how different our two countries are.
And Ill remain here, even if you keep forgetting. Ill forget that I have any other home but here.
Yes, sir, I've often been to PisaPisa, famous for its serious citizens.
Then God be blessed, it's the blessed sun. But it's not the sun when you say it isn't, and the moon changes with your mind. Whatever you name it, that's what the thing is, and so it will always be for Katherine.
No, be smart. We still haven't seen anything actually happen. She may still turn out to be honest. Just tell me this: have you occasionally seen a handkerchief decorated with strawberries in your wife's hand?
The gods know that there has never been an assistant racked with sadness for his lord the way I am looking at you.
Then quickly say what it is you want.
No, Ill summon him as I would a spirit. Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover! Appear to me in the form of a sigh. Speak just a single rhyme, and Ill be satisfied. Cry out, Ah me! Say love and dove. Say one pretty word to my good gossiping friend Venus. Say the nickname of her blind son and heir, Cupid, who shot arrows so accurately and made King Cophetua fall in love with a beggar maid.Romeo doesnt hear me, stir, or move. The little monkey is dead, so I must conjure him to appear. By Rosalines bright eyes, by her high forehead and her red lips, by her fine feet, straight legs, and trembling thighs, and by parts of her that lie next to her thighs, I summon you to appear before us in your actual form.
You have a servant named Lucilius.
Good sister, don't wrong both me and yourself by turning me into a slave. I won't stand for that. But if it's my jewelry and clothes you wantuntie my hands and I'll pull them off myself, yes, everything down to my underwear. Or I'll do anything else you command me to do, for I know that it is my duty is to obey my elders.
Lie with her? Lie on her? To lie on someone is to tell lies about that person! To lie with herthat's obscene. First the handkerchief, and now this confession! Should he confess first and then be executed? No, I'll kill him first and let him confess later. I am trembling with anger, and nature wouldn't make my body do this without some reason. It must be more than a rumor if it's making me tremble like this. Ugh! Noses, ears, and lips. Could this be true? That he would admit to itand the handkerchief! Oh, devil!
These walls of ours were not built by the people who insulted you, nor were they people that deserve their work to fall for the faults of others.
He who is dizzy thinks the world spins round.
Call it whatever you want; the day is yours. And I hope no one here is jealous of you. Some artists are good, but according to the standards of art, some are excellent; you're clearly the best that art has to offer. [To THAISA] Come, daughter, queen of the feast (since that's what you are), take your place. Direct everyone to do what they're supposed to. [He seats THAISA at the high table]
[To FLAVIUS] You go to the senators. I deserve an audience with them. Ask them to send me a thousand talents.
No, leave him be. I'll get him in a different way. I'll sue him for assault and battery, if there's any justice and law in Illyria. I struck him first, but that shouldn't matter.
Why, that's what he didand now you'll be released from the prison of earth, to be free among the joys of heaven.
Give her my true love's kiss. And so, farewell.
It only concerns you. I'm not bringing a declaration of war or a demand for praise. I'm only bringing you an olive branch. My words are full of peace.
For treating your injured shin.
[Whispering] Yes, or else I'll beat him with a club and make him yell "O!"
Monster, if you want to be a good monster, please say something.
Sir Christopher, bring this message to Richmond for me: my son George Stanley is locked up in the deadly boar's pen. If I revolt, off goes young George's head. My fear of that happening prevents me from helping right now. So go quickly, and give my regards to your lord. Also say that Queen Elizabeth has readily agreed that Richmond should marry her daughter Elizabeth. But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
Tarsus, which I rule, was once wealthy. We had everything we wanted: the streets were strewn with riches, we built towers up to the skies, and every visitor who came here was amazed. Our men and women wore fine clothes and jewelry; they were like mirrors to each other's own riches. They had more than enough food on their tables. No one was poor. We were proud; we couldn't imagine needing help from anyone.
Is this a joke?
A pretty spirit! My clever Ariel, listen closely. [He whispers to ARIEL]
I can find the logs without bothering Peter.
Villain, not on your life! Take off my mistress's gown for your master's use!
Cousin, put down your gage. Don't you start as well
Have you read the truth?
Now, if you're really my friend, let me see his letter.
The news is very favorable and good, my lord: Richard is hiding not far from here.
You must depart tonight.
Away with this old fool! Take him to jail!
It might, or it might not.
Ah, Desdemona, go away, away, away!
The people who banished you are no longer living. Their shame at their actions broke their hearts. March into our city with your banners, Alcibiades, and if in an unnatural hunger for revenge you'd like to kill one tenth of the entire city, let those unfortunate enough to have gotten such a bad turn of the dice die for all the rest.
According to my nurse, my father wasn't afraid. He just called out to the sailors, "Good seamen!" and helped them, pulling the ropes with his own hands, and holding onto the mast to ride out the waves that almost broke the ship.
You're trying to hide your evil with a show of hospitality, but it's hypocrisy; it only looks good from the outside! If I'd really gotten the answer wrong, then that would mean you weren't dirtying your soul by committing disgusting incest. But now, by sleeping with your daughter, you're both father and son, acting more like a husband than a father . . . and she's filling the role her mother should, taking her mother's place in your bed. They're both like snakes who eat pretty flowers but produce deadly poison.Goodbye, Antioch! I'm smart enough to know that a guy who's comfortable doing one evil thing won't hesitate to do another one if it'll keep him from being found out. One sin leads to another; murder is as close to lust as fire is to smoke. If I stick around, I'll be poisoned, or accused of treason, anything to keep me from exposing him. So, to save myself and not expose him, I'll leave here and escape the danger I'm afraid of.
What will you do with it? Why have you been so eager for me to steal it?
I can't speak; I can't think or wrap my head around what I know now. [To FLORIZEL] Sir, you've ruined an eighty-three-year-old man who only wanted to die in peace on the same bed where his father passed away, and to be buried near him. Now some executioner will bury me, alone.[To PERDITA] How dare you continue to play around with him, knowing he was the prince? Ruined! Ruined! If I die within the hour, I'll be glad to be out of my misery.
Don't refuse this love we offer you, mighty lord.
What about the bag? What's in the bag? And why the box?
Go ask him for his name.
It's a dish I love to eat.
That's why it's a "sensitive" story. I was just knocking to see if your ear was listening. But now I'll begin: first of all, we came down a muddy hill, my master riding behind my mistress.
Holy father, it is there along with my master, whom you love.
Well then, sir, I'll sing a lullaby to your generosity while I'm gone, so it can nap until I return. I'll go now, sir, but don't think that I'm doing this just because I'm greedyI'm more interested in the art of begging than the actual money. But as you say, sir, let your generosity sleep, and I'll wake it up soon.
What? Let me see her. No! Shes cold. Her blood has stopped, and her joints are stiff. Life left her body a long while ago. Death rests on her like an unexpected frost that killed the most beautiful flower.
You should know this much: by a strange chance, the goddess of luck (whom I now love) has brought my old enemies to this island. And by my magic senses, I can tell that my opportunity for good fortune depends on this lucky circumstance. And if I do not act but instead do nothing, then I will never again have such an opportunity. No more questions now. You are sleepy. Its a good time for sleepiness, so give in to it. I know you have no choice.
Will we hear from you before we go to sleep, Catesby?
The quicker the better.
Immortal Diana!
But you avoid getting motivated, so you dont ever have to hit.
You hate medlar?
You should know, my loving lord: I've heard that the Marquess of Dorset has fled to Richmond in France.
But listen, sir: we're the ones that pulled this armor out of the rough sea, so there are certain conditions, certain respects to paid. I hope, sir, if you're successful, that you'll remember where you got it from.
[He skims the letter] This letter corroborates the friars story. It describes the course of their love and how he heard of her death. Then he writes that he bought poison from a poor pharmacist and came to this tomb to die and lie with Juliet. Where are these enemies? Capulet! Montague! Do you see how your hate has cursed you? Heaven has in response conspired to kill your joys with love. And because I did not take a firm hand against your feud, Ive lost two of my family members as well. Everyone is punished.
It can't be anything else. You'll see him high and mighty in Athens again, to be sure. For that reason it's not crazy to appeal to him in his supposed distress. It'll look good for us, and it is likely to end in us receiving what the others got, if it is in fact true that he has money.
I mean to enter the house, sir.
What is this? What are you talking about? It's true that my brother's daughter is the Queen of Tunis as well as the heir to the throne of Naples, and that a great distance separates those two places.
Blue, sir.
My job isn't to debate the reason. It's just to do it.
Never, my lord. So prepare to die.
You made an oath of eternal love, which was confirmed by joining hands, proved by a holy kiss, and strengthened by an exchange of rings. I witnessed and approved all this in my official capacity as a priest. All this took place only two hours ago.
[Reading the oracle] Hermione is virtuous,Polixenes is blameless,Camillo is a loyal subject,Leontes is a jealous tyrant,The baby is his biological daughter,And the king will have no heirUntil he finds that which is lost.
I found it in my room, and Iago himself just confessed that he left it there on purpose as part of his plan.
Good question, my dear girl. My story does indeed bring up that question. My dear, they didnt dare. Because I was so loved by the people of Milan, Antonio and Alonso had to keep any blood from staining their actions, and hide their evil goals behind a prettier picture. In short, they hurried us onto a ship and carried us a few miles out to sea. There, they had prepared a rotten shell of a boat that had no ropes, equipment, sails, or a mast. Even the rats had abandoned it when they sensed its likelihood to sink.They lowered us down into the water. We were left to cry out to the sea, which just roared back at us. We sighed in sadness to the wind, which sighed back in pity. And in doing so it buffeted us with winds thatno matter how lovingonly made us more uncomfortable.
I swore I would, so here we go . . . [He grabs MARINA]
Actually, it seems the "fool" goes with you.
Yes, she may, Lord Rivers. Why, everyone knows that she may. And she may do more than just denying that, sir. She may help you to many nice promotions and then deny that she aided you, claiming that you won those honors through your own merit. What may she not do? She may, yes, by God, she may
Oh, I am a villain.
Your argument is contradictory, a forced attempt to make gross actions seem justifiable. Your rhetoric reaches almost to the point of labor as it tries to turn murder into a mere formality and feuding into an act of valor. Feuds actually prove to be valor in its most degenerate form, as they come from the formation of rivalries. A man is truly valiant only when he can endure the worst insults men can speak, and even wear them like clothing without a care in the world. True valor never takes injury to heart, or retaliates in violence. If acts of injustice are in fact evil and force us to kill others, how dumb it would be then to risk your life for such a cause!
You can say it, but don't swear it.
I'm afraid that meat like that is choleric and will make you angry. What do you say to a fat cow stomach, well-broiled?
Look at this huge crowd of flooding visitors. I have in this draft of my poem drawn the outline of a man beloved and embraced by the earthly world. I do not mean to represent particular people, but work in generalities as if my tablet were an entire sea of wax. Personal grudges do not affect even the smallest details of my writing. My creative process flies forth, strong as an eagle in flight, and leaves no trace of its earthly inspirations.
Holy lady, you've spoken so highly of us foolsit's almost as if your eldest son was going to be a fool. And may God cram his skull with brains, for here comes one of your relatives whose head is quite empty.
[To GREMIO and HORTENSIO] Gentlemen, I want to make good on what I've saidso Bianca, go inside. And don't let this make you unhappy, good Bianca, for I'll never love you any less, my girl.
I already said that, you stupid thing. Caliban, who I now keep as a servant. You know better than anyone the pain you were in when I found you. Your groans made wolves howl, and made perpetually angry bears feel pity for you. The spell that Sycorax put on youand which she could not undowas something fit only for souls damned to hell. When I arrived on the island and heard you, it was my magic that made the pine tree open and let you out.
What is your name? Has mankind been so awful to you? You are a man, after all.
Is she as fiery a shrew as she's reported to be?
Oh, sir, I wish you would listen to my advice; you might need it.
Down to the last detail. I boarded the kings ship. And from the prow, to the middle of the ship, to the stern, and in every cabin, I took the form of a fire and sent everyone into a terror. Sometimes I would divide myself, and burn at many places at once. I burned on the main mast, the yards extending from the mastand, at the same time, split to burn the bowsprit extending from the prow. Then I joined back together to form a single flame. Not even Jove's lightningwhich precedes and then causes thundercould move as fast as I did. The fire and deafening cracks of my burning seemed to terrify even mighty Neptune, the god of the sea, and made his waves tremble and his weaponthe tridentshake.
What's this here? Is he dead or drunk? Check and see if he's breathing.
The hart.
What, are they dead?
Alas, he has been betrayed, and now I am ruined.
What is the matter?
Youre a lover. Borrow Cupids wings and use them to soar higher than the average man.
You have undone our mother.
[To STEPHANO] Ill swear on that wine bottle in order to become your loyal subject, because that wine must come from heaven.
Flaminius! Can we talk for a second? Is Timon coming?
He's well known to me. You are welcome for his sake.
I also said I needed to deal with some business matters, but he didn't care. I am not happy to say it, but when he asked me for money, I had no more left to give him.
Quietly and quickly, sir. The priest is ready.
I am from Messaline. Sebastian was my father, and my brother was also named Sebastian. He was dressed just like you when he drowned. If ghosts can take on human forms and clothes, then you must be here to frighten us.
And what else?
You weeping princes and sorrowful nobles who bear this mutual weight of grief, let us now cheer each other up with our love. Though we have lost our old, fruitful king, we will now reap the harvest of his son. Our former hatreds were only recently broken and then rejoined as friendship, and now we must gently preserve, cherish, and keep this new goodwill. It seems like a good idea that a small group of us should now set out for Ludlow Castle in Wales, to fetch the young prince and bring him here to London, where he will be crowned our king.
If you will come have dinner with me tonight, then okay. If you don't come to dinner then just keep on waiting until I call for you nextwhich will be never.
I'll do it with all my heart, and it pleases me to see how remorseful you've become.
Yes, I did, sirand now I've got a plan!
Now, fellow, what are you carrying?
Here, madam, at your service.
Go away, go on, you're a foolish fellow. Leave me alone.
Madam, here comes my husband.
It's so weird how Timon must pay out more than he owes, while your lord seems to get the privilege of wearing the jewels and getting to request the money paid for them.
Fool!
With all due respect, Petruchio, please let us poor petitioners get a word in too. Stand backyou're too forward.
That king is like a picture of my own father; looking at him reminds me of how glorious he once was. He used to have princes sit around his throne like stars, looking up to him like the sun. No one who saw him could hold a candle to his greatness; those smaller lights were outshone by his supremacy. I, his, son, am just a little firefly. You can see me at night, but I'm invisible in the day. From this, I can say that Time rules men. He raises men up and he puts them in their graves, and doesn't always give them what they want.
Then I think it's time for me to smile again. Oh, how easy it is for the poor to be proud of something they don't have! But if I must be defeated, then better to be defeated by a noble enemy than a lowly one.
Why should you feel sorry for her?
[To himself] He'll make the man go crazy, pretending that he's a woman.
No doubt, no doubt. Oh, he's a dangerous and cunning boybold, lively, ingenious, outspoken, and capable. He takes after his mother, from head to toe.
Or even walk. Instead youll lie there like sleeping dogs and say nothing.
Psst! Romeo! Psst! Oh, I wish I could cry out like a falconer, so I could call my little falcon to return to me. Stuck as I am in my familys house, I have to be quiet. Otherwise I would tear open the cave where Echo sleeps and make her call out my loves name until her voice grew more hoarse than mine by repeating, My Romeo!
My lord, it's Ratcliffe, it's me. The village rooster has already crowed twice to welcome the dawn. Your friends are up and putting on their armor.
When I destroy Athens in war
How well you've depicted the scene! This throne, this depiction of Fortune, and this hillwith one man beckoned from the rest below, bowing his head before the great mountain on which Fortune sits, the source of his happinessperfectly captures the human condition.
My legs can't keep time in delight, when my poor heart can't keep time in grief. Therefore, no dancing, girl; something else to pass the time.
I will. Go, Biondello, and tell your mistress to come to me.
Right, because I mean you.
If only Leonine hadn't been so slow! He should have killed me instead of talking so much. Or if only the pirates (as if they weren't barbarous enough) had thrown me overboard, to go after my mother!
Well, you have a father who cares for you, child. To help you escape your sadness, he has arranged a soon-to-come day of joy that you didnt expect and that I had not considered.
You don't have enough strength to do me half as much harm as I can endure. Oh, you fool! You idiot! You are as ignorant as dirt! You've dome something so awful . . . I don't care about your sword. I'd spread the news of this even if I was killed twenty times. Help! Hey, help! The Moor has killed my mistress! Murder! Murder!
And for me also. And so, I think, for all of us. But since our agreement is so fresh, we shouldn't risk putting it under too much stresswhich might happen if all of us go at once to fetch the prince. So I agree with noble Buckingham that it's best for only a few to go.
Hello, my lord. I'm glad to see you.
To "fare well" is more than you deserve. But since you're now teaching me how to flatter you, pretend that I've said "farewell" already.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
Should Timon really have to struggle for this? He could go to Lord Lucius or Lucullus for a loan, and he could also call on the rich Ventidius, who is free from prison thanks to Timon. All these men owe some of their wealth to Timon.
And did you see the handkerchief?
She loves you too much to hurt you, boy.
I thank them, and would send them a disease if only I could catch it for them.
All the sooner because you asked, sweetheart.
Come, rich Ceres, and entertain Juno.
Aaron, what should I tell the empress?
If God had decided to give me some affliction, if he had put all kinds of shameful sores on my bare head, had made me extremely poor, and made me a prisoner with no hope, I would have found a way to endure it. But, alas, to make me a laughing-stock forever, and an object of scorn! And yet, I could even endure that too, very well. But to do something to my heart, on which my life depends, which pumps all the blood through my veins, to dry it up and turn into a basin for foul toads to wallow and couple in! The very god of Patience could look at my heart with her young, rosy lips, and her complexion would turn grim as hell!
That you love my daughter from your soulfar from your soul. Just like you loved her brothers. And from my heart's same love I thank you for it.
Benvolio is a Montague. His loyalty compels him to lie. Hes lying. There must have been twenty Montagues fighting, and together all twenty of them could only kill one man. I beg for justice that only you, Prince, can give. Romeo killed Tybalt. Romeo must die.
If you want to see the real results of this joke, then watch him when he first approaches my lady. He'll come to her in yellow stockingsa color she hatesand with crossed laces on his legsa fashion she despises. And he'll smile constantly at her, which will go completely against her current mood, as she seems addicted to melancholy lately. All of it together will surely make her notice him and scorn him. If you want to see this, follow me.
Then do it tomorrow night, or Tuesday morning. Or Tuesday at noon, or Tuesday night, or even Wednesday morning. You name the time, but please sometime within the next three days. Truly, he regrets what he's done, and his error wasn't really that seriousexcept that, as they say, military discipline requires that you be most strict with the best soldiersand should barely have even required a private scolding . When will Cassio come back? Tell me, Othello. If you asked me for something, I wouldn't just say no, or stand there hesitating. What do you say? Michael Cassio helped you when you were courting me, and whenever I criticized you he stood up for you. Why should it be so hard for him to get to talk with you? Trust me, I could do a lot
Sir, if I knew my statue would make you so upsetsince it belongs to meI wouldn't have showed it to you.
My weak arm, my gracious lord, is as close are you're going to get to an army: gloom guides my tongue and makes me speak of nothing but despair. Returning one day too late, I'm afraid, noble lord, has ruined all your happy days on earth: oh, call back yesterday, tell time to run backwards, and you would have had twelve thousand men to fight for you! But today, today, unhappy day, it's too late: your joys, friends, fortune and kingdom are lost. For all the Welshmen, hearing you were dead, have left and gone to fight for Bolingbroke.
It's reported that Sir Thomas Lovell and the Lord Marquess of Dorset are gathering an army in Yorkshire. But I bring your Highness this comfort: Richmond's navy has been dispersed by a storm. At Dorsetshire, Richmond sent a boat to shore to ask the men on the banks if they were his allies. They answered that they were with Buckingham. Richmond didn't trust them, and he hoisted sail and returned to Brittany.
Ill fight their entire army of devils, one at a time.
What?
I am watching, by God, I am. It's a good play, to be sure. Is there any more?
Spiteful and intolerable treatment! How can I endure this monstrous behavior? I know where this came fromcan I bear this? He acts as if his traitorous sons, that died lawfully for murdering my brother, have been unjustly killed by me! Go, drag the villain here by his hair; I won't go any easier on him because he's old and honored in battle. For this proud mockery I'll kill him, the crafty, crazy bastard, who helped to give me the throne hoping he could take control of Rome and me.
Kill me tomorrowlet me live tonight!
Romeo will thank you, my girl, for both of us.
Oh, but from that no hope arise amazing hopes for you! No hope for Ferdinand's survival is, for you, so high a hope that not even ambition for greatness could imagine anything higheror even entirely believe that this possibility exists. Do you agree with me that Ferdinand has drowned?
Madam, there's a young gentleman at the gate who greatly desires to speak with you.
[To FERDINAND] Wait, sir! I have one more thing to say.[To himself] Theyre in love with each other. But I have to put some obstacles in the way of this quick love, so that they dont undervalue their love because it came so easily.[To FERDINAND] Just one more thing to say. I demand that you listen to me. You are stealing a name for yourself that does not belong to you. Youve come to this island as a spy to try to take this island from me, its lord.
Since I hope to enjoy quiet days, beautiful children, and a long life filled with the love that I have now, not even the greatest opportunity or strongest temptation will allow my worse instincts to overcome my honor, and let me give in to lust. Doing so would only remove the anticipation from that day's celebration, when I'll be so excited for my first night with Miranda that I'll wonder if the sun has stopped in the sky, or if night has been locked away somehow.
Do I look as pale as everyone else, Lord Dorset?
No sir, God forbid, but I am ashamed to kiss.
Father, whats the news? Did the Prince state how I am to be punished? What unknown suffering is coming for me?
But I have no pity, so I must not be a beast.
If I do not consent to her marriage, with the gods as my witness, I will choose my heir from all the beggars of the world and deprive her of everything.
The nobleman would have done with her what a nobleman does, but she sent him away as cold as a snowball, and saying his prayers, too.
What is the matter, lady?
I can't admit to things that I haven't done. As far as Polixenes is concerned, I can only confess that I loved him as much as I should, with the kind of love that a woman in my position should givethe kind of love that you, yourself, commanded that I show. If I hadn't cared for him, I would have been disobedient to you and inhospitable toward your friend. I mean, you've loved Polixenes since before you could speak, since you were a baby, and he's always loved you back. As for conspiracy: I've never tasted it, despite the fact that you keep serving it to me on a plate. All I know is that Camillo was an honest man. God only knows why he left your court; I have no idea.
I wouldve been a dreadful king, then.
I've told you all that I know. Why the nobles were arrested, and on what charges, is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
[As LITIO] But this is not Katherine, that quarrelsome know-it-allthis is the goddess of heavenly harmony. So let me go first, and after we've spent an hour on music, you can have the same amount of time for your lesson.
The same thing that was in my words.
It is Alcibiades and twenty horsemen, all together.
You flatter my misery.
May God protect me from false friendsbut my uncles weren't false.
A man calling himself Prince Florizel, son of Polixenes, is here with a beautiful princess. He's asked to see you.
Yes, I'll do that. And from now on I'll be smart and always try to be good. What a magnificent jackass I was, to think this drunkard was a god and worship the dumb fool!
For what reason, I ask you?
If you had hated meddlers sooner, you would have loved your station better now. What wasteful man did you ever meet that was well-liked after his money was gone?
Whichever it is, it's a mistake.
I wish they were basilisks, so they could strike you dead.
His clothes are fancy, but he's not wearing them elegantly.
That will make me think the world is full of rubs, and that the ball is weighted against me.
I am Christopher Sly. Don't call me your "Honor" or your "Lordship." I've never drunk Spanish wine in my life. And if you give me anything "preserved," give me some salted beef. Don't bother asking what "outfit" I'll wear, for I have no more jackets than I do backs, no more stockings than I have legs, and no more shoes than I have feet. Sometimes I even have more feet than shoes, unless the ones where my toes stick out count as shoes.
I will not rise until your Highness hears my request.
Why does it have to be this way? It cannot be. Please, my lords, I beg you to trust me.
Are you biting your thumb at us, sir?
What now? We'll have to try a different tactic with you. Your worthless virginitywhich isn't worth a cheap breakfast eaten in the nightisn't about to ruin this place; I'd rather be neutered like a dog than see that happen. Come with me.
[To himself] I am almost afraid to stand here alone in the graveyard, but Ill do it.
Let me prove it, my gracious lord.
That's a good one. But come on, begin.
Yes, ruined land, my lord.
What promise, dear?
What villain, madam?
Why, what would you do there before I arrive?
First improve my company and get away from me.
I dont know, sir.
That doesn't make any sense.
Please be calm, my good man.
Do you know these two?
Away! Get away from me! You have tortured me. I swear it's better to be horribly betrayed and not realize it than to know a bit about it.
Oh, my good lord, foul murders have been committed outside!
Did you start that young? Were you a prostitute at the age of five or seven?
Where is he?
Good job, that vagueness will keep you from being accused of slander.
I will not go.
For what crime?
Amen to that! Let's go, good Eglamour. Let's go out at the back gate by the abbey wall. I am afraid that some spies are following me.
God bless you, friend, and your music. Do you make your living by playing your drum?
If it would please your Lordship to have us.
By heaven, you accuse me wrongly!
Not at all, sir. I live by the church because I live in my house, and my house is by the church.
Then why don't you tell the story! If you hadn't interrupted me, you would have heard about how her horse fell, with her under it. You would have heard about the swampy place she landed, and how she was covered in mud, and how my master left her with the horse on top of her, and beat me because her horse stumbled, and how she waded through the dirt to pull him off of me, and how he swore, and how she prayedshe who had never prayed beforeand how I yelled, and how the horses ran away, and how her bridle was broken, and how I lost my saddle strap, and many other things worth being remembered, but which will now be forgotten, and you'll go ignorant to your grave.
Put away your sword. If this young gentleman has offended you, then let the blame pass to me. And if you've offended him, then I'll fight you on his behalf.
Oh please, woman. Throw your vile guesses back to hell, where they came from. You are jealous now and think that this handkerchief is from some mistress. No, in truth, it isn't, Bianca.
Sir, you speak well, and you understand well. And since you declare yourself a suitor, you must do as we already have, and pay this gentleman to whom we all owe so much.
They're Senators of Athens. How lucky is he!
Then prove it.
Yes, if only they were our assistants!
You are all welcome; please let the ladies kindly enter. Music, play them in!
[Giving a paper to the FIRST SERVINGMAN] Invite all the guests written on this list.
I'm worried we won't be.
How are things, Roderigo?
I don't want a bigger one. This one agrees with the present fashion, and all gentlewomen wear caps like this.
Past noon.
Noble lord, I ask you to pardon me for another night or two, or at least wait until nightfall. Your doctors have expressly ordered me not to sleep with you, as otherwise you might be in danger of a relapse of your illness. I hope this reason will stand as my excuse.
God, I'd rather be his executioner than his flag-bearer.
My noble lord, he asks your Grace to please visit him tomorrow or the next day. He is inside with two priests, deep in prayer. He doesn't want to be disturbed from his holy labors by any worldly business.
If youre a man who's playing that music, show yourself. If youre a devil, then you can go to hell.
Why, you are king, my glorious lord.
Then no man has ever been an honest man.
A man, good lady, whom God has made for himself to ruin.
Go, idiots, go, and fetch me my supper.
Let it go. Some men might be more optimistic. Your truthfulness, your being what you proclaim to be, make ungrateful men more noticeable.
I hope not, considering how much merchandise I have with me.
Hopefully the reading of the prophecy is as successful as our journey (for the queen's sake). It was a great, enjoyable, quick trip, but we can only hope it was worth the time.
The truth will come out, the truth will come out. Me, be quiet? No, I will speak as freely as the north wind blows. I don't care if all angels and devils and humans cry out that I am shameful for disobeying my husband, I will still speak out.
Give me your hand. It's moist, my lady.
My little hawk?
Well, sir, its a bad cook who refuses to lick his own fingers. So I wont hire any cooks who wont lick their own fingers.
Am I that name, Iago?
Well, give her that ring, and with it, this letter. That's her room there. Tell my lady that she should keep her promise and give me her heavenly picture. Once you deliver the message, go home to my room, where you will find me sad and alone.
None, sir. I have no pheasant, male or female.
All men do, except Proteus.
A thousand thanks, Sir Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio.
Oh, it's going to be great!
No eyes are as beautiful as hers were. Don't be afraid of me marrying a wife, Paulina; I won't marry a new wife.
The hand that kills me will burn in hell forever. Exton, you've stained the land with its own king's blood. Go up to heaven, my soul! Your place is up there, while my body sinks downward to die.
[Singing]It was the friar in robes of gray,Who walked along on his way:
I think his soul is in hell, lady.
It's a terrible thing to die when you're unprepared and not expecting it, my gracious lord.
I am a prince, MirandaI think I'm probably now a king, though I wish that were not trueand normally I wouldn't tolerate being forced to carry logs any more than Id let insects fly into my mouth. But listen to this, from the bottom of my soul. The moment that I saw you, my heart rushed to serve you, and it remains there as your servant. So, for your sake, I patiently carry these logs.
Yes, for the worst of you is filthy, and I fear too rotten to hold.
Oh, I wish that my sovereign might turn away his face and be deaf for a little while, until I have told this villain how God and good men hate foul liars like him.
A thousand misfortunes greater than this one have taught me how to endure this patiently.
It's very suspicious, even though it's only a dream. And this may support and strengthen other, shakier evidence.
Come, come, we're worrying about the worst possible outcome. I'm sure that everything will be all right.
Hey, Mountain, hey!
Ive seen you in the moon, and I love you. My mother showed you to me, as well as your dog and bundle of sticks.
Here is Servilius. Now we'll know what is going on.
You saw my bad luck even when I had my wealth.
This sounds good. He will return soon enough.
Yes, just now, sir. I've only made it this far, walking at a moderate pace.
What do you want with her, sir?
Absolutely not; she's locked in her room and it's impossible to get her out. She's sworn to remain a virgin for another year, and swears on her honor she won't go back on her promise.
You can rely on me. Go, get some money. I've said it before, and I'll say it again and again: I hate the Moor. My objective is set in my heart. And you are equally determined in yours. Let's work together to get our revenge on him. If you can get Desdemona to cheat on him with you, you'd get some pleasure and I'd get some amusement. There's still much that may happen. Now go, go and scrounge up your money. We can discuss this further tomorrow. Goodbye.
They're the empress's sons, Chiron and Demetrius.
Woe, woe for England! I pity her fate, but save no pity for myself. I might have prevented this, but I was too foolish. Stanley dreamed that the boar cut off his head, and I laughed at him and refused to flee. Three times today my horse stumbled, and he bucked when he looked upon the Toweras if reluctant to carry me to the slaughterhouse. Oh, now I need that priest I spoke to earlier! And now I regret boasting to the pursuivant that my enemies were being butchered at Pomfret while I was safe and secure. Oh, Margaret, Margaret, now your heavy curse has fallen on poor Hastings' wretched head!
For goodness' sake, have her hanged!
Why should madmen hear, when wise men cant see?
May you live long and miserable too, then die.
Well, she cant be a prostitute unless shes so stale and old that shes only tasted when nothing else is available.[He sings]Old rabbit meat Old rabbit meatIs good meat if you cant get anything else,But old moldy rabbit,Is a waste of your coinIf it goes moldy before you can eat it[He speaks] Romeo, are you going to your fathers? Were having lunch there. Lets go.
This will be remembered as a holy day. I wish to God that all troubles could end this well. But I must also ask your Highness to pardon your brother Clarence.
I swear.
Theres none of that, or just a little.
Who, Othello? I think he got so much sunlight where he was born that it burned the jealousy out of him.
What happened to his ship and his servants?
The best news is that weve found our king and his men alive and safe. The next best news is that our shipwhich we thought had split in half just three hours agois as well-constructed, seaworthy, and well-supplied as it was when we first set sail.
I salute you, my queen!
Truly, sir, I can't give you a reason without using words, and since words have become so false and unreliable, I'm hesitant to use them for my proof.
Put up my tent! I'll sleep here tonight. But where will I sleep tomorrow? Well, it makes no difference. Who has spied out the size of the traitor's army?
Will I really go win my daughter over for you?
This doesn't sound much like madness.
Do whatever you want. I'll find you as long as you're underneath the sky.[To himself] I'm reeling them in now, even if you can't see my fishing line. Oh, come on! Look how she holds up her mouth, her lips to him! As confidently as if he were her own husband! [POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and their servants leave] There they go! I'm in thick and deep, over my head, and horns are sprouting above my ears! [To MAMILLIUS] Go play, boyplay! Your mother's playing, and I play such a horrible part that its reviews will put me in my grave; booing and hissing will be the last thing I hear.[To the audience] Unless I'm mistaken, plenty of men have been cheated on by their wives before now. There may even be a man here, as I'm speaking, holding his wife by the arm not knowing she slept with someone else while he was gone. Little does he know that his neighbor (you know the one, Mr. Smiley) stuck his fishing rod in that pond while he was out of town. It's actually comforting to know that I'm not alone in having something taken from me against my will. If all men who've been cheated on gave up on themselves, ten percent of the male population would hang themselves. There's no solution to it. We live on a raunchy planet and the raunchiness can strike at any time (and powerfully, believe you me) from the east, west, north, or south. It'll let the enemy in and out with bag and baggage. Thousands of us suffer from this and have no idea. [To MAMILLIUS] What's up, son?
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell you this: today you will watch a man die for truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
Oh, murdering scoundrel! Oh, villain!
He's been fortunate to have such a speedy trip. It's as if the storms themselvesthe high seas, the howling winds, the jagged rocks, and the heaped up sandsnormally bent on wrecking ships, have recognized the beauty of the divine Desdemona and went easy on her ship, letting her travel safely.
Oh, sir, Lucentio just let me off his leash like a greyhound. I did the running, but the catch was for my master.
Me, marry her? A prostitute? Please, think a little more highly of me; don't think I'm that stupid. Ha, ha, ha!
Are you trying to convince me that I wasn't sent to fetch you?
The handkerchief!
And it's such a pity that the noble Moor has made someone with such a weakness for alcohol his second in command. I really ought to tell Othello about this.
Tell my guard to be on alert. Now leave me. Ratcliffe, come to my tent around midnight and help me put on my armor. Now leave me, I say.
Shame on you, dishonorable Satan! I address you with moderate language, for I'm one of those courteous people who will be polite even to the devil himself. Did you say that this house is dark?
Oh! I am afraid I know what you mean by that. What, is he dead?
No, my good lord, don't be afraid of shadows.
Once I've started this, I cannot stop.
Will you freely give me the crown?
Nothing, except follow my demands.
Allow me to let you leave now.
Aaron, I see you wouldn't trust the air with your secrets.
[As LUCENTIO] Be patient, good Katherine, and you too, Baptista. I swear Petruchio means well, despite whatever might be keeping him from honoring his word. Though he's rude, I know he's exceedingly wise, and though he's a joker, he's still an honest man.
And for that reason, my lord, we make sure to watch him all day and night, and take care of him as best we can, until perhaps time will heal him.
Yes, and he will until the day he dies. Old age and senility hurt wise people, but improve fools.
Now I can see that hes a lying, drunken monster. When his god falls asleep, hell steal the wine bottle.
Good evening. You've come from Varro for money?
The note is a low note and a liar, if it says I said so.
Oh, you're ignorant! You give the best praise to the worst women. But what would you say about a truly virtuous woman, one that even malicious people would have to admit was a good person?
Is the throne empty? Does the royal sword have no owner? Is the king dead, the kingdom dispossessed? What living heir of the York family is there but me? And who can be England's king but great York's heir? So tell me, what is he doing at sea?
Where shall I meet you?
[To RICHARD] I was the last to help you to the crown, and the last to feel the sting of your tyranny. Oh, in battle remember Buckingham, and die in terror of your own guilt. Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death. And tomorrow, fall and despair, and despairing die!
What are you going to do to me?
Yes he is worthy of you, and to pay you for your labor. He who loves to be flattered is worthy of the flatterer. God, if only I were a lord!
You sweet soul, careful now, be careful about lying. You are on your deathbed.
Good morning, Richmond.
Tell me what you want.
Yes, madam.
There's a fire ready. So tell me the news, good Grumio.
[As LUCENTIO] Pardon me sir, for the boldness is all my own. I am a foreigner in this city, but I have come to make myself a suitor to your daughter, the fair and virtuous Bianca. I'm also aware of your firm decision that your eldest daughter must marry first. All I ask is that, once you know who my parents are, you make me as welcome as Bianca's other suitors, and give me the same freedom and permission as the rest. And as for the education of your daughters, I here contribute a simple instrument and this small pack of Greek and Latin books.
Sir, I understand.
Where is that ring, boy?
What storm is this to cause so many different disasters? Has Romeo been killed, and Tybalt too? Tybalt, my dearest cousin, and Romeo who as my husband was even more dear to me? May the last trumpet play to signal the onset of doomsday, because who could remain alive if those two are gone?
Why, sir, what do you mean by that?
Oh, pardon me, Sir Gremio. I'm just eager to get down to business.
I hope it flows this way, my lord!
That will be done soon. I remember our plan.
I offer you my obedience, madam, and my most humble service.
It's him. Oh, brave Iago, you are honest and just, to care so much for a wrong done to your friend! You teach me by your example. Unchaste woman, your dear boyfriend lies dead, and your own damned fate hurries your way. Whore, I'm coming for you. Your charms, your eyes, are erased from my heart. Your bed, stained with lust, will soon be stained with your lusty blood.
[To himself] They say that those who are so wise when so young never live long.
Why did I come here if not for that? Do you think a little noise can frighten me? Haven't I heard lions roar? Haven't I heard the windy sea rage like an angry boar? Haven't I heard cannons on the battlefield, and thunderheaven's artilleryin the sky? Haven't I been at war and heard loud calls to arms, neighing horses, and trumpets blasting? And now you warn me about some woman's tongue, which isn't even half as loud as a chestnut popping in a farmer's fire? For shame! Save your bogeymen to frighten children.
Well, fair sir, and you, my cheerful mistress, you've surprised me with your strange behavior, but know that my name is Vincentio, my home is Pisa, and I am headed for Padua. I'm going to visit my son who I haven't seen in a long time.
Hello, sir! How's the world treating you?
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, take the crown; here, cousin. [Bolingbroke steps forward to take the crown, but Richard won't let go.] My hand is on one side, and yours is on the other: this golden crown is like a deep well with two buckets; when one goes up, the other goes down. Im the bucket at the bottom, full of tears, while you go up even higher.
Why? What's the matter?
This is really the air, and that's really the glorious sun. Here's the pearl she gave meI can feel it and see it. And though I'm full of amazement and confusion, I'm not crazy. But where's Antonio, then? I couldn't find him at the Elephant. But he had been there before me, and they told me that he was walking about the town and looking for me. His advice would be like gold to me right now. My soul makes the same strong argument as my senses, which is that all this is some mistake, but that I'm not crazy. Yet this mistake is such a sudden flood of good fortune, which exceeds all my expectations or possibility, that it makes me distrust my own eyes and wrestle with my reason, and suggests that maybe I am insaneor that the lady's insane. But if that were so, she wouldn't be able to run her house, command her servants, and take care of all her business affairs in the smooth, discreet, and stable way that she does. There's something deceptive going on here. But here comes the lady.
You would have just as little joy as you imagine if you were indeed this country's king. As the queen, I have had no joy.
"And asked to see you always wearing crossed laces going up your legs."
Sir, you go in. Madam, go with him. And you too, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare to follow this beautiful corpse to her grave. The heavens hang over you for some unknown reason. Stop fighting heavens will, and it will no longer move against you.
Claribel, Alonso's daughter.
Please, sir, let me speak with her first and then I'll leave you.
No. If the foundation of everything I believe turns out to be fake, the whole thing will collapse. [To the lords] Take her away to the prison! Anyone who tries to defend her is guilty, too.
My extreme grief notwithstanding, I hereby pronounce this trial open. It pulls at my heart strings; really, it does: the party tried here today is both the daughter of a king and my beloved wife. In doing this, it should be clear that I'm not a tyrant; I'm proceeding openly in the due course of justice, whether it leads to a "guilty" sentence or an "innocent" one.[To the officers] Bring in the prisoner.
A mighty man of Pisa. I know him well by reputation. You are very welcome, sir.
Did Desdemona give it to Cassio? No. I found it and gave it to my husband.
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest of the story of how our two cousins came into London, since crying made you stop.
I am reminding your Grace of what you promised me.
Yes, proud of the fact that I'm not you.
I wish you the best, Servilius!
And with great unwillingness I'll go. Oh, I wish to God that the golden crown I must wear would turn to red-hot steel, and burn my skull to the brains! Let me be anointed with deadly venom instead of holy oil, so I can die before anyone manages to say, "God save the Queen!"
What's your family crest? A coxcomb?
Ill take the young rooster, Adrian.
My Lord of Hereford, my message is for you.
The fool is good at acting. A good fool.
Indeed, she's a young, delicate creature.
[Offstage] Hello, my daughter! Are you up?
Here it is, sir: [Points at GONZALO] Although this lord with the bad memoryand who won't be remembered by anyone when hes dead and buriedalmost persuaded the king (because his entire mind is focused only on persuading people) that the king's son is alive, its impossible that he didn't drown. Saying he survived is like saying that this man sleeping over here is actually swimming.
He must be a really important courtier.
A sweet voice if I ever heard one.
Go wiggle your donkey's ears.
Near this coast, I bet.
Why, "Jack, boy! Ho, boy!" and whatever other news you want.
Alas, my lord, that's no fault of yours. If that's the problem, then our brother, the king, should arrest those who named you instead. Or maybe his Majesty intends to baptize you and rename you in the Tower. But what's the reason for this, Clarence? Will you tell me?
She will be, once she's my wife.
Now, you sunburned farmersso tired from all the work you must do in Augustcome here from your rows of planting and have fun. Celebrate. Put on your straw hats and dance with these young nymphs.
May I be next! Death is hard, but it ends the struggles of our lives.
[To RATCLIFFE] May God protect the prince from the pack of you! All of you are damned bloodsuckers.
Then, Bolingbroke, I say that you lie from your heart through your throat. I paid three-fourths of the money I had for Calais to his highness' soldiers; the rest was given to me by prior agreement, since the king owed me money for my expenses when I last went to France to fetch his queen: so take back that lie. As for Gloucester's death, I didn't kill him; although I admit I let down my sworn duty in that case.  As for you, my noble Lord of Lancaster, the honorable father to my enemy, I once tried to kill you, an offense that now grieves my soul greatly. But before I last received the sacrament, I confessed it and begged your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it. These are my crimes: as for the rest accused against me, it comes from the malice of a villain, a cowardly and violent traitorwhich I'll prove with my own strength, and throw down my gage upon this proud traitor's foot, to prove myself a loyal gentleman, even in the chamber of his body where all his "noble" blood flows. So I eagerly beg your highness to set a day for our duel.
She's so beautiful that, if I could only be assured she came from an aristocratic family and noble blood, I couldn't find a better choice, and would marry her. Beautiful girl, you can expect to be rewarded generously for helping the sick king here. If your artistic talents are successful in getting him to respond to you in anything, we'll pay you anything you want for the healing.
Nor living ones, I hope.
[Speaking in French] And you also. At your service!
No, let us share your thoughts, as you do ours.
Of course; he speaks very highly of you, and is always rewarding you for a job well done.
Oh no, I showed you the numbers several times and put them right in front of you. You would throw them away and say you had me look at them. I have said no and cried when you offered huge amounts of money in return for small gifts, and I have told you to be tighter with your wallet, so bluntly that it was almost rude. I faced many hard outbursts of yours when I told you about your shrinking estate and your growing debts. Now that you are listening to me it's too late, and still I have to tell you that all your money will only pay half of all that you owe.
I hear that last night they slept at Stony Stratford, and tonight they'll rest in Northampton. Tomorrow or the next day they'll be here.
Has he said something?
No harm would come to you but the loss of such a husband.
What's that noise? Ill act fast. Oh, what luck: heres a dagger! Ill be your sheath. Rust inside my body, and let me die. [She stabs herself with ROMEOs dagger and dies]
Nope, I won't raise someone else's kid.
Old John of Gaunt is deathly sick, my lord; it came on suddenly. He has sent a message asking your majesty to visit him.
There he is.
The great storm parted our ships.
Are you Revenge? And have you been sent to me to torture my enemies?
A messenger from Lord Stanley.
I don't know, madam. He's a good-looking young man, and has some attendants with him.
Oh king, don't believe this hard-hearted man! He doesn't know how to love his own, so how can he love you?
Help, help! My master's gone crazy.
A witty reply! What do you say, Hugh Rebeck?
Good flag-bearer, welcome. And welcome, ma'am. [He kisses EMILIA] Now, good Iago, don't get mad that I'm kissing your wife hello. I was brought up to show courtesy that way.
[To SAMPSON so that only he can hear] No.
Sir, pardon me for what I have to say. I like your plainness and honesty. It is indeed true that your son Lucentio here loves my daughter, and she loves himunless they're both good at pretending. Therefore, if you have nothing else to say, and agree that you will treat your son as a father should and settle on a sufficient widow's inheritance for my daughter, then the match is made, and all's done. Your son will marry my daughter with my consent.
I also hold no hope that he survived.
It's yours, your Grace.
Bring him aboard. And bring some gentlemen with you.
It's a troupe of actors, your Honor, offering to perform for your Lordship.
Turn the ship close to the wind! Set both sails to push us back out to sea! Push her away from the land!
Ruined, at the last minute! I wasn't afraid, though. I was about to tell him that the same sun that shines in court shines here at our cottage, looking down on us equally.[To FLORIZEL] Will you go, then? I told you what would come of this. Please, remember that you are a prince. It was all a dream. Now I'm awake, and I won't imagine I'm a queen anymore. I'll just go back to my sheep and cry.
Fool, I'll repay you for this many times over. Now please, go.
[To PROSPERO so that only he can hear] Sir, all of what he describes is the work Ive done since I left you.
He's not always a Puritan, though. He doesn't remain anything for long, except for a flatterer and a yes-man, an affected jackass who tries to talk like the nobility. He has such a high opinion of himself and thinks he's so crammed full of excellent qualities that he's sure everyone loves him. And that's the weakness that I'll use to get my revenge on him.
What name, fair lady?
Well, aren't you full of cony-catching!
Are you celebrating like a triumphant Roman general? Are you triumphing after your conquest?
Madam, your mother wants to speak with you.
I'm sure you areit's better for your business when your clients keep from getting sick! What new stock do you have here that might allow a man to enjoy his whores and keep the sexually-transmitted diseases at bay?
[As the banquet is being prepared] What a party!
I do love my country, and contrary to what rumors may say, am not glad to see total destruction.
Come on, Romeo. Starting a new fire will put out the old one. An old pain is lessened by the arrival of a new one. If you make yourself dizzy, you can cure yourself by spinning in the other direction. A new grief will cure an old one. Stare obsessively at some new girl, and your former lovesickness will disappear.
Honest? What's that mean? If you pointed to any old day on the calendar, we wouldn't know what it meant.
Perdita, are we forgetting anything? Let's talk. [They talk privately]
Oh god, defend my soul from such deep sin! Shall I seem humbled in my father's sight? Or disgrace my high rank and look like a fearful beggar before this coward? Before I lose my honor by saying those shameful words, I would bite out my tongue and spit it in Mowbray's face.
Come on, my boys! Cheer up, cheer up, my boys! Quickly! Quickly! Pull down the topmost sail. Follow the masters whistled commands. Blow, you wind, until you have nothing left to blast! Well survive as long as we have enough room to maneuver without running aground.
My soul depends on it
Don't harp on that string, madamthat's in the past.
It may look like someone is dead for hours, but then they revive and come back to life. I heard of an Egyptian who was dead for nine hours and then, with some help, recovered.
Then you're a fool, holy lady, to mourn your brother's soul being in heaven. Now take away the fool, gentlemen.
Because then he, our hope, might have brought his army here and defeated our enemy's hopesfor banished Bolingbroke is back in England, and is safely arrived at Ravenspurgh with an army at his back.
What? What?
If my hearts dear love
Quiet, Grumio. It is my rival for Biana's love. Petruchio, let's watch a while.
I'll teach you how to move, to act.
Hes having a fit, and saying things that don't make sense. Ill give him a taste of the wine from my bottle. If hes never drunk wine before, itll go a long way to stop his fit. If I can get him better and tame him, it would be impossible for me to charge too much for people to come and see him. Hell make a lot of money to whoever owns him, that's for sure.
Are we really?
Every man help everyone else, and dont look out only for yourself, because everything that happens is just a product of blind luck. Courage, you noble monster, courage!
Up and down, up and down.
Oh, not all of them, my friend, not all. If all beggars were whipped, I would want no better job than to be a beadle. But master, I'll go pull the nets in.
Why did you look for me?
Oh Stephano, do you have any more of this wine?
Ever since I can remember.
That our clotheswhich were drenched in sea watercontinue to be fresh and clean, and in fact seem almost new rather than stained by the salt water.
Answer me now. Can you love Paris?
Well, your brother's love; our duty; and your own crimes now provoke us to kill you.
Why do you cry, "Ah?"
Well, forget about that. Dorset has fled to join Richmond.
Did you say he has his princess with him?
No, he cannot speak. Honest Iago has taken care of that.
[Reading] "I am the scale, the foundation of all harmony:A re, to declare Hortensio's passion;B mi, Bianca, take him for your husband,C fa ut, he loves you with all affection;D sol re, I have one key but only two notes;E la mi, show me pity, or I'll die."You call this a scale? I don't like it. I prefer the old-fashioned way. I'm not so foolish as to want to replace the old, true methods.
Wait, madam. I must speak with you.
Get out, you damned doorman! Without this virgin keeping it up, this whole house would collapse and bury you! Away!
I wasn't faking that. He is a worthy man.
Man, these ugly rags hurt me more than the millions of punches and kicks I just received.
And we also tried to reach out to Timon and express our city's love for him with a message of humility and promised riches. We were not unkind, and we do not deserve to fall to war.
This is a joke. Some angry god has sent you here to make the world laugh at me.
But how is it that you have this ring? I gave it to Julia when we said goodbye.
Now, where's my wife?
A tornado, if you could, and tell them that I have more gold here. Look, right here.
Good morning, neighbor. Where are you hurrying off to?
Only God knows.
Do you want to go hunting, my lord?
Whatever it is, it's very heavy. Open it up quick! If there's too much gold laying on the ocean floor, it's good luck that the sea has thrown it up to us.
Fine,  just please wait until tomorrow morning.
Go on, man, you must be hanged.
Sir Proteus! How's it going? And Turio, how are you? Which of you saw Sir Eglamour recently?
Lord, don't let me ever be brought to such a silly state of affairs where someone could treat me like that!
You have little reason to say that.
I see that you don't intend to part with her, or else you don't like my company.
No, I am not. You will not let me be welcome, because I have come to remove you.
[To TIMON] Sir your presence has saved me from my longing, and I feed most hungrily at the sight of you.
No, she let it drop carelessly. And, since I happened to be here, I took the opportunity to pick it up. Look, here it is.
You already have thrown yourself away, being the madman you were, and now an idiot. Do you really think that this cold air will act like a manservant and put on a warm shirt for you? Do you really think that these mossy trees, which have outlived eagles, will follow your every step? That the cold brook crusted in ice will give you a warm drink to cure a hangover? Call out to the animals who live naked despite the fall of man, who expose their bodies to the harsh elements and contend with nature. Call them to flatter you and, oh, you will find
My lord, what do you mean by that?
Continuing on would have made your tale too long.
Excellent! Why, this nonsense talk is the best kind of fooling when all's said and done. Now sing us a song.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Miss Maria, if you care at all about Lady Olivia's approval, then you won't bring more wine and contribute to this boorish behavior. She'll hear about thisI'll tell her.
Happy indeedthat's the way we've spent the day. Brother, we have done deeds of love, turning enmity to peace and hatred to love between these misguidedly angry nobles.
I hope sobecause then you'll never sleep.
Here's mine.
Oh Dorset, don't speak to me. Leave immediately. Death and destruction are snapping at your heels. Your mother's name has become a bad omen. If you want to outrun death, then go. Cross the seas to France, and live with Richmond, out of the reach of hell. Go, run away. Run away from this slaughterhouse, before you end up a body increasing the number of the dead, and make me die the slave of Margaret's curseneither wife, nor mother, nor England's queen.
Where will I find you when I'm done?
We can, your majesty. It's not his fault that she came here.
No, madam, no. I cannot do that. I am bound by oath, so you must forgive me.
Come on, then, and whisper it in my ear.
Tell me, seriously, who is the one you love?
Oh, Eglamour, you are a gentleman. Don't think that I'm flattering you; I swear I'm not. You are brave, wise, compassionate, well-accomplished. You know how much I care about the banished Valentine, and how my father wants to force me to marry the foolish Turio, whom I hate with all my heart. You have been in love. And I have heard you say that you have never felt more grief in your heart than you did when your ladyyour true lovedied. And you have vowed pure chastity on her grave. Sir Eglamour, I want to go to Valentine in Mantua, where I heard he is. And since the journey is dangerous, I would like your worthy company, because I rely on your faith and honor. Don't encourage my father's anger, Eglamour. Just think about my griefa lady's griefand about the justice of my running away from here; and from a most unholy marriagewhich heaven and fortune would always make horrible. This is coming from a heart as full of sorrows as the sea is full of sand. I want you to keep me company and go with me. If you won't then keep secret what I have said to you so that I may go alone.
Generous madam, whatever happens to me, I'll always be your loyal servant.
Paulina, you've comforted me so much.
The work would suit me as much as it suits you, and it would be easier for me because I want to do it, whereas you do not.
Lets say goodbye to him.
You are deceived. Your brother Richard hates you.
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
Gonzalo's word is like the legendary harp of Amphion, which, when played, caused the walls of Thebes to rise. Now Gonzalojust by saying sohas created a whole new city.
Everyone knew that there would be revenge for it.
Sir Toby, madam, your uncle.
Here comes another group of people looking for you.
My lords of England, let me tell you this: I know my cousin has been wronged, and I've done all I could to do him right. But to come like this, with an army, to help himself to what he wants at the dinner table, to do right by doing a wrongit must not be. And you that help him do this are all damned rebels.
My God! What crimes were committed against us that we ended up here? Or was our coming here a blessing?
Lots of people who stay in their rooms aren't sick, and if he's as sick as you say he is, all the more reason for him to pay off his debts before he dies.
He was kind to me, sir, and drew his sword to defend me, but then he said some strange things to me. I don't know what he meant, except that he might be insane.
Please do, beat him up well, but don't draw your sword.
I said she's dead; I'll swear it. If you don't believe me, go and see for yourself. If you can bring the color back to her cheeks, open her eyes, or get her breathing again, it would be a miracle. You tyrant! Don't you dare repent what you've done. These crimes couldn't be offset even if you mustered every ounce of remorse in your body. From now on, your whole life should be nothing but misery. A thousand people praying naked and fasting on a mountain in a perpetual winter storm for ten thousand years could not convince the gods to have mercy on you.
Cheer up. Give me a smile. Here, love, see how diligent I amI've prepared your meat myself, and brought it to you. I am sure, sweet Kate, that this kindness deserves your thanks. What, not a word? Well, then I guess you don't like it, and all my work was for nothing. Here, take away this dish.
But didn't you want to have it cut, too?
Why not?
Yes, but now he can't be calmed down. Fabian can barely keep him from coming over here now.
Sir, I'm not holding your hand.
I couldn't be less like you in that way, Timon.
He's as tall and brave as any man in Illyria.
He has songs for men and women of all shapes and sizes. He can fit a song to a crowd better than a tailor can fit a suit to your body. He has love songs for the ladies (and they're not dirty, none of that funny business your average street musician puts into his songs).
True, madam. And let me comfort you: when our ship was wrecked, and you and the few other survivors hung onto our drifting lifeboat, I saw your brother tie himself to the mast that was floating on the wavesacting with courage and hope in the middle of great danger. For as long as I could see him, he safely rode upon the waves like Arion on the dolphin's back.
He had dinner at my house, but that's not why I'm shaking.
A kind and loving wish.
No.
Here is a friar, and dead Romeos servant. Theyre carrying tools for opening a tomb.
I've changed my mind about that.
Beat him up some more. After a little while, Ill beat him up too.
Your mother is of the same species: what is she if I am a dog?
Well, sir, I have nothing better to do, so I'll go along with this.
A sail, a sail!
That's the reason for this, that's the reason, my soul. I won't say the reason to the chaste stars in the sky, but it is the reason. But I won't shed her blood, or scar that skin of hers that is whiter than snow and as smooth as alabaster. Still, she must die or else she'll betray more men. Extinguish the light, and then extinguish her light. If I extinguish you, flame, I can light you again if I have second thoughts. But as for youyou most artfully, excellently fashioned womanonce I put out your light, I don't know of any magical fire that can bring your life back. When I have plucked the rose of your life, I can't re-plant it againit must wither. I'll smell you while you're still alive. Oh, your gentle breath almost persuades Justice herself to put away her sword! One more, one more kiss. If you look like this when you are dead, I will kill you and love you after. [He kisses DESDEMONA] One more, and that's the last. There was never anything so sweet and yet so deadly as you. I can't help but weep, but that is not a sign of pity. This sorrow is like that of God, who must strike down the creatures he loves. She's waking up.
Oh, make them joyful. Grant their request!
Well said.
Good King of Cats, I want nothing more than one of your nine lives. Ill boldly take that one, and, depending on how you behave after that, I just may also beat the rest of the eight out of you too. Will you draw your sword from its sheath? Hurry, or mine will be at your ears before you have yours out.
May the gods protect me!
Your words are sweet music. Come here, Tyrrel.
I'll rejoice, man. You know, he got me in trouble with my lady Olivia once, when I held a bear-baiting here.
Why, sweet Othello
Sell all my land.
[To ALONSO] Noble sir, we all feel under the weather when youre feeling gloomy.
There's nothing to worry about, sir. The baby was imprisoned in the womb, but she's been freed by natural law. She's not under any accusations from the king, and she can't possibly be guilty of anything the queen did.
Your debt was owed six weeks ago.
But quiet! Here come the executioners I've hired.
Such honest men! How could I ever repay you? Can you eat roots or drink cold water? No.
You think I'll answer you? Noblemen don't answer servants!
[To MIRANDA] What? Do you, my daughterwho owes me obediencedare to tell me what to do? [To FERDINAND] Sheathe your sword, traitor. You put on a nice show there, but you wouldnt dare to actually strike me because you feel too guilty. Step out of your defensive position. For, if I wanted to, I could use this magic wand to disarm you and make your sword drop.
It was nine oclock when I sent the Nurse. She promised to be back in half an hour. Maybe she cant find him. No, that makes no sense. Oh, shes so slow! Loves messengers should be thoughts, which fly ten times faster than sunbeams and drive the shadows back over the dark and scowling hills. Thats how fast swift-winged doves carry the goddess of love in her chariot, and why Cupid has wings that propel him as quickly as the wind. Now the sun is at its highest point in the skyits noon. Three hours have passed since nine oclock, and yet she hasnt returned. If she were young and in love, shed move as fast as a struck tennis ball. My words would bounce her to my sweet love, and his words would bounce her back to me. But old people act as though theyre already deadawkward, slow, heavy, and pale as lead. Oh God, shes here! Sweet Nurse, whats your news? Did you meet with him? Send your servant away.
But why, my good man?
South-west.
On my way, sir.
Now I'll go to old Andronicus and deal with him with all the cunning I have, to get him to bring proud Lucius here from the warrior Goths. And now, sweet emperor, be cheerful again, and don't be afraid, since I'm taking care of it.
After six frozen winters have passed, come home from banishmentwith my welcome.
[As LUCENTIO] It's some strange whim of his that inspires this fashionthough he does often dress casually.
My love for your Grace makes me say forcefully among all these lords that the offenders should be executed. My lord, they deserve death.
Why, madam, have I offered you my love only to be mocked in front of the king? Who doesn't know that the gentle duke is dead?
It's someone named Iago, the general's flag-bearer.
I was willing to condemn my own brother to death, and now you want me to pardon a servant? My brother Clarence didn't kill anyone. His only fault was his ideas, and yet he was punished with bitter death. Who pled on his behalf?  When I was so angry, who kneeled at my feet and asked me to think about what I was doing? Who spoke to me about brotherhood? Who spoke about love? Who told me how the poor soul abandoned his father-in-lawthe mighty Earl of Warwickto come fight for me? Who told me of the battlefield at Tewkesbury, where Clarence rescued me when Oxford had me down, saying, "Dear brother, live, and be a king?" Who told me how, when we both lay in the field almost freezing to death, he wrapped me in his own clothes and left himself naked, exposed to the mercy of the numbingly cold night? All this seemed erased from my memory in my brutish rage, and not a man of you had the grace to remind me. But when your servants drunkenly kill someone and scorn the law of our dear Christ, you immediately get on your knees and beg, "pardon, pardon." And I, unfair as I am, must give it to you. [Stanley rises] But no one spoke on behalf my brother, and I didn't speak to myself on his behalf either, the poor soul. Even the proudest among you owed him something, and yet none of you would beg for his life. Oh God, I fear that your justice will punish me and all these gathered here, and our families as well, because of this!
Eternal thanks, my poor-man bankers; this richness must stand for my reward until my infant fortune inherits his due. But who comes here?
Thanks, gentle Romans; I hope that I'll govern graciously, to heal Rome's wounds and suffering. But, gentle people, give me a moment to mourn my father. Everyone stand aside. But uncle, come closer, to cry with me on this body. Oh, take this warm kiss on your pale cold lips.
[To herself] Ah, no joy for that "queen" indeed. For I am the queen, and completely unhappy. I can no longer hold myself back.
Truly, sir, I'm better because of my enemies, and worse because of my friends.
Much better than I was, my friend. I can stand and walk; I'll even say goodbye and make my way toward my uncle's house.
Every man's clean conscience is like a thousand swords to fight against this guilty murderer.
Then show it to me.
We can make you speak with torture.
Oh, stop it! You'd starve to death in that case. [To FLORIZEL] Now, my dear: if only I had some spring flowers for you and for my friends. Spring flowers are fitting for young virgins. I wish I had the flowers the spring goddess threw away when she was carted off to the underworld! I wish I had daffodils (the earliest spring flowers), violets (so dark and sweet), primroses (that die when kissed by the sun), oxlips (the royal flowers), and every kind of lily, including the fleur-de-lis! Unfortunately I don't have any of these to make a flower-crown for you, or to throw on top of you!
What, are you ashamed of me?
Not even a hair was harmed on anyones head. The clothes that helped keep them afloat in the water not only didnt get stained, but are in fact cleaner than they were before the storm. And, as you told me to do, Ive scattered everyone from the ship in a few different groups around the island. I brought the kings son all by himself to the land, on a far corner of the island. Hes sitting there with his arms crossed like this in sadness [ARIEL crosses his arms], and cooling the air with his sighs.
Such an act of despair would prove my guilt.
It seems you would rather be at a breakfast with your enemies than a dinner with your friends.
What, is he angry?
She's ruining the name of our profession.
Aren't you the Lady Olivia's fool?
I think I recognize that voice. It must be...But hes drowned, and I'm surrounded by devils. Oh, God protect me!
If he'll do as he says, then that's good. But Hortensio, have you told him about all her flaws?
I am forever in your debt.
I'm no traitor, sir, I swear.
What would my mighty master like? I am here.
Oh, it's this that makes your wife mourn!
[To FERDINAND] Follow me.[To MIRANDA] Dont speak in his defense. Hes a traitor.[To FERDINAND] Come, Ill chain your neck and feet together. Youll have only sea water to drink. Your food will be fresh-water mussels, old roots, and empty acorn shells. Follow me.
Did she reject so many noble suitors and turn her back on her father, her country, and her friends just to be called a whore? Wouldn't that make anyone weep?
A thousand pieces!
Whatever I speak, I'll risk my life to prove it true. Mowbray has received eight thousand gold coins as a loan to pay your highness' soldiers, which he's embezzled for his own ill ends, like a false traitor and a con man. Besides I say and will in battle proveeither here or elsewhere, in the farthest place that an Englishman ever sawthat Mowbray is responsible for all the treasonous plots devised in this land for the past eighteen years. Furthermore, I say (and further will prove by challenging him in combat) that he plotted the Duke of Gloucester's death by putting his easily-persuaded enemies up to it, and consequently, like a traitorous coward, parted the innocent soul from its resting place as the blood flowed out of his body. His blood, like Abel's, cries out to me for justice and vengeance even from the silent depths of the earth; and, by all my ancestors, I'll do it with my two hands, or I'll die instead.
Yes, you want to leave so you can join Richmond. But I won't trust you.
My lord, from Oxford I've sent the heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely to Londonthey were two of the dangerous traitors that plotted against you.
He will die.
Sir Toby, I must be plain with you. My lady told me to tell you that she lets you stay here because you're her relative, but she doesn't approve of your disorderly behavior. If you can start cleaning yourself up, you are welcome to stay in the house, but if not, and you would prefer to leave, then my lady would be glad to bid you farewell.
Why, this must have been modeled on a porridge bowl! It's like a velvet dish! For shame, for shame, it's worthless and filthy! Why, it's like a cockleshell or a walnut shell, a knickknack, a trifle, a baby's cap. Take it away! Come, let me see a bigger one.
Here comes Brabantio and the brave Moor.
[As LUCENTIO] Sir, from your clothes you seem to be a wise, respectable old gentleman, but your words show you to be a madman. Why, sir, what is it to you if I should wear pearls and gold? Thanks to my good father, I can afford it.
Its the way to behave when a scoundrel like him shows up. I wont stand him coming here.
Or one of Daphne running through a thorny wood, her legs scratched up and Apollo weeping at that sad sight. The blood and tears are drawn so well you'll swear that they're real.
Oh, heaven; oh, earthwitness the words I'm going to speak. And if I speak the truth, bless them with the outcome I hope for. If Im insincere, then take all the good fortune that's in store for me and turn it bad. More than anything else in the world, I love, cherish, and honor you.
[As VINCENTIO] You are lying. His father has already come to Padua, and here he is looking out the window.
No, madam, but I'm reading the words of craziness. And if you want things done the right way, then let me do a dramatic reading.
Wheres Potpan, whos not helping us clear the table? Has he even moved or scraped a plate?
That way I would improve my own company for the lack of yours.
We must both give them and take them, my loving lord.
Oh, sir, if I were to deny you that service, the most just gods would send a plague of caterpillars, one for every grain we didn't give, to afflict our country. But let me ask again: can I hear the story of how your king came to be so sad?
Let me look! If he's not my husband, my religious spirit won't let me get excited just by hearing; I'm inclined not to believe, having not seen. [She comes face to face with PERICLES] Oh, sir, are you Pericles? You spoke just like him, and you look just like him . . . did you mention a storm, a birth, and a death?
Take the fool away.
Yes, so we will.
My lord, he waits to speak with you in the lower courtyard, if you'll come down.
Be smart and go back home.
Both, both, my girl. We were forced from our old positions by crimes, as you call them. But we were blessed in the help we received that allowed us to end up here.
You missed a sight to be seen; I can't really explain it in words. They were so overjoyed that both of them were moved to tears. They looked up to heaven and held each other's hands. They looked so much alike that we could only tell them apart by their clothes! Leonteswho was about to leap out of his skin, he was so happy he found his daughtercries out, "Oh, your mother, your mother!" as if the joy made his grief new, too. He asked Polixenes for forgiveness, then hugged his new son-in-law, then hugged his daughter again, then thanked the old shepherd who stood by like an old watchman. I have never heard of anything like it. No report can fully sum it up. Description doesn't do it justice.
Lacking the thing which would make the hours short if I had it.
There's never been a woman that was foolish and pretty. For even the stupidity of such a woman would help her find a man.
And me too, good Lord!
Speak freely, good man.
I'm not very strong if some puny little man can take my sword from me. But then again, why should my honor live on after my honesty is dead? I'll let it all go.
Give me the pickax and the crowbar. [He takes them from BALTHASAR] Now, take this letter. Deliver it to my father early in the morning. [He gives the letter to BALTHASAR] Give me the torch. [He takes the torch from BALTHASAR] By your life, I command that no matter what you hear or see, you stay away, and do not interrupt me in my actions. Im going to go down into this tomb in part to look upon my wifes face, but more importantly, to take a precious ring from her dead finger. I must use the ring for urgent business. So go, get out of here. And if you get suspicious and return to spy on what Im doing, I swear Ill tear you limb from limb and throw your body parts around this graveyard, which is so hungry for death. The times, and my plan, are wild and savage, and I am more fierce and unstoppable than a hungry tiger or the raging sea.
Sir, I'll tell you, since you're bringing honor into this. Listen closely and do exactly what I say as soon as I say it, otherwise you and I are both done for!
Father, I can't be that forward with a strange knight. He might be offended by the offer, since some men take women's gifts as disrespect.
What if she's pretty and foolish?
Can your servant be trusted? Have you ever heard the saying, Two men may keep a secret, but only if one is far away?"
I don't think anything in the world could change it. You're so lucky to have your young prince, Mamillius. He's the most promising kid I've ever met.
I'll tear Desdemona to pieces!
My lord, don't you think that this talkative little York was encouraged by his deceitful mother to taunt and scorn you in that outrageous manner?
That's what he's supposed to look like.
May each day be happier than the one that came before, until heaven, jealous of earth's good fortune in having such a king, gives you an immortal crown after death.
Oh, I have enough work for you to do. Publius, Caius, and Valentine, come here!
May heaven give us even more love and comfort as we get older.
Well, he's gone off to the taming school.
They are. My strength is all tied up, as if in a bad dream. The loss of my father, the physical weakness I feel, the destruction of all my friends, the threats of this man whos captured me would be like nothing to me, if I could just look through my prison windows once a day and see this girl. I would not need to have the freedom to go anywhere else in the world. A prison like that would give me all the space I needed.
Locked up togetherexactly as you commanded and just as you left them. Sir, they are prisoners in the grove of lime trees that shields your hut from bad weather. They cant budge until you release them. The king, his brother, and your brother are waiting, out of their wits. Everyone else is worried about them, and completely shocked and sad. The one you called the good old lord Gonzalo is the most upset. Tears run down his beard like melting snow from a thatched roof. Your magic has affected them so deeply that if you saw them now, youd feel bad for them.
Criticism and debauchery surround him.
No, sir. He's healthy and stronger than most men at his age.
All is luck, only luck. Maria once told me that Lady Olivia liked me, and I've almost heard Olivia herself say that if she should love a man, he would be someone with my personality. Besides, she treats me with more respect and admiration than anyone else in her service. So what should I think of all this?
He's hopeless. Let's go back and try whatever else we can do to save ourselves.
Oh, then, saint, let lips do what hands do: pray. Grant my prayer or my faith will turn to despair.
Im not proud of what you found, but thankful for your efforts. I cant be proud of what I hate. But I can be thankful for what I hate, if it was meant with love.
Why, what is going on, General? Don't talk like that.
My brother, your uncle, whose name is AntonioI beg you, listen carefully (oh, how could a brother be so treacherous!)was the person whom I loved more than anyone else in the world, other than you. I trusted him to manage Milan where I ruled, which at that time was the most powerful city-state in Italy. I, Prospero, was the most powerful duke, and was admired for my dignity and my unmatched knowledge of the liberal arts. Because I spent all my time absorbed in studying secret topics, I let my brother run the government and lost contact with my city. Your lying uncleare you listening to me?
Get your cloak and go straight to Lord Timon. Ask him to give me my money, and do not take no for an answer. Don't even stop asking for my money when he asks you to bring him to me. Tell him that I am busy with other things, and that the terms of his loans have expired and that my kindness to his delays in repaying them has damaged my credit. I do like him, but I cannot suffer for his sake. I need money right away, and I will not accept excuses, only what I am owed. Go now, and make sure to seem urgent, like you are demanding and not asking him. I am afraid that by the time every creditor tries to take back what Timon borrowed from them, he will default with nothing, left like a naked seagull after everyone has plucked a feather from his wing, despite his current brilliant, phoenix-like appearance. Go right away.
Sweet Captain Blunt, if it can be done without too much danger, find a way to speak with him, and give him this important note from me.
I'll believe both those things too. And if there's anything else that seems like it can't be real, just come to me and Ill swear its true. Travelers have never told lies, even if fools back home accuse them of making things up.
Ill speed through the air in front of me, and I'll be back before your heart beats twice.
Ill give him equal thanks, so were even.
They've treated me like their property here, kept me in the darkness, sent their minions after methose asses!and done all they could to drive me insane by pretending I was insane.
This island contains everything that is good for life.
Padua contains nothing that isn't pleasant.
She speaks my language! God, Im the highest-ranking person of all the people who speak this language. If only we were back where its spoken.
Tell Bagot to come in. [Bagot enters.] Now, Bagot tell me honestly: what do you know about noble Gloucesters deathwho conspired with the king? Who committed the murder?
Good to see you, Sir Hortensio. Do you know where I'm going? To see Baptista Minola. I promised that I would find a teacher for the fair Bianca, and my good luck has led me to this young man. His manners and learning are well-suited for her needs, and he's well-read in poetry and other booksgood books, I assure you.
[To RIVERS] Don't try to argue with her. She's a lunatic.
Then let your eyes be the witness of their evil. [He shows his arm] See how I am bewitched! Look at how my arm has shriveled up like a withered tree branch. This is the work of King Edward's wife Elizabeththat monstrous witchand her associate, that whorish Jane Shore. They've done this to me with their witchcraft.
Then I hope you will not kill me.
What do you want from me?
Oh God, my soul senses some evil coming! It seems to me that, standing down there as you are, you look as if you are lying dead in the bottom of a tomb. Either my eyesight is failing me, or you look pale.
An inappropriate kiss!
[Singing]Come onto these yellow sands,And then take my hands.When youve curtsied, and kissedThe wild waves into quietness.Step lightly here and there,And, sweet spirits, carryThe burden. Listen, listen!
May the gods' will be done! Get back on board the boat; I'll be back in a minute.
Stop, for God's sake!
At least two hours past. We must treat the time between now and six o'clock as precious, and waste none of it.
Nathaniel's coat wasn't ready, sir, and Gabriel's shoes didn't have the proper pattern on them. Peter's hat was the wrong color, and Walter's dagger needed a sheathe. The only ones properly dressed were Adam, Rafe, and Gregory. The rest looked like ragged old beggars. But here they are sir, and they've come as they are to greet you.
All right then, you do what you want. I won't go today, or tomorrow either. I won't go until I feel like it. The door is open, sir. There's the way out. You'd better get an early start. As for me, I'll leave when I want to. If you throw your weight around so rudely at the very start, I'm sure you'll prove to be a surly, overbearing husband.
The chaplain of the Tower has buried them. But to tell you the truth, I don't know where.
Hello. What time is it?
Here comes the man who rescued me, sir.
Kindness pours out of him. Even Plutus, the god of gold, seems like just a mere apprentice of Timon's. There is no service given him that he does not repay seven times in value. There is no gift he receives that doesn't return to the giver a sense of value exceeding the price paid for it.
Oh, Paulina, I want to believe that she lives. No perception of reality could be as blissful as that kind of insanity. Leave it alone.
It's my husband's. I remember being set in the sea right after I gave birth, but don't know how I washed up here. Since I'll never see my husband, King Pericles, again, I'll become a nun and will never be happy again.
It's just and reasonable to want to take revenge on the man who killed my husband.
You're lying, you hussy. It's Hortensio, isn't it?
Believe me, I would rather have lost my purse full of coins. Losing my handkerchief would be enough to make my husband jealous, if he were less loyal and more of a jealous man.
Who's ringing that bell? The devil! It's going to wake up the town. For shame, lieutenant, stop or you'll never live this down.
Why, gentlemen, you both do me wrong in arguing over something that is really my decision. I am no schoolboy to be whipped and disciplined. I won't be ordered about with hours and appointed schedulesI will learn my lessons as it pleases me. So to cut off all this arguing, let's sit down and figure this out.
Are you done?
Im happy to see you, my lady and my wife.
And here comes the lieutenant, right on time.
For this reason, if you want to know: because she's the chosen beloved of Sir Gremio.
How can you be so poor and wretched and still be afraid to die? Your cheeks are thin from hunger. Starvation and oppression are visible in your eyes. Your poverty, and the contempt of others for your situation, is like a monkey on your back. The world is not your friend, and neither are the worlds laws. The world doesnt provide a law that will make you rich. So dont be poor. Break the law, and take this money. [He holds out money]
Swear on this sword of justice that you, Cleomenes and Dion, have been to Delphos and have brought back the sealed oracle delivered to you by Apollo's priest. Swear that, since then, you have neither broken the holy seal nor read the secrets inside.
A guy with a reputation for hanging out with prostitutes. I know he used to be the prince's servant. He was kicked out of court for one of his virtues; I can't remember which one.
What do you say, Juliet? Can you love this gentleman? Tonight hell be at our feast. Look at his face and delight in his beauty. Examine how all the lines of his features combine to make him handsome. And what you cant see in his beauty, find by looking in his eyes. This wonderful, loving man lacks only a bride to make him perfect. As fish do not hide from the sea, neither should a beauty like you hide from a handsome man like him. Everyone thinks hes handsome, and whoever becomes his bride would be equally loved. You would share all that he possesses, and lose nothing by having him.
A good reputation is the most precious jewel of a man's or a woman's soul, my dear lord. If someone steals money from me, it's not a big deal. It was mine, now it's his, and it's been held by thousands of others. But if someone steals my good reputation from me, then he really does make me truly poor, and steals something that doesn't even make him any richer.
Since it's spring, sirsummer's not over yet and winter hasn't comethe prettiest flowers blooming at the moment are carnations and multicolor gillyvors, which some people call "nature's bastards." We don't grow those here, and I'm not a big fan.
What did he ask you for?
Please, my lord, there is no need for that.
Neither.
Whatever, he's poor and that's punishment enough for him. After all, who can say whatever he wants more than the man with no home and nothing to lose?
Certainly not, in that case. You'll have the mustard or else you'll get no beef from Grumio.
[Giving the FOOL money] That's for your trouble.
The trumpets show that the emperor is here.
Thank you. How is Lieutenant Cassio doing?
As eagerly as I ever came home from school.
I thank you for telling me. Here comes the duke.
Indeed, that's clear to see. I am not at ease with the discrepancy in the reports, but I understand the general idea of all of them, and it makes me worried.
[To ANNE] Come, madam, come. I was sent in a great hurry.
Not because your eyebrows are dark, although they say dark eyebrows look good on some women. It's better if you pluck them in a semi-circle, or draw a half-moon shape with a pen.
I will release you from any obligation to me.
If there is any such man, may God have mercy on him!
Please, pay attention to me. I neglected all things related to ordinary life or politics, and dedicated myself entirely to seclusion in order to improve my knowledge of topics that have more value than is commonly believed. But by cutting myself off from the world, I unknowingly awoke evil in the heart of my brother. Like a good parent who raises a bad child, my trust in him produced the opposite effect, making him into a liar as big as my trust in him wasand my trust in him had no limit. My confidence in him was infinite. Now established in his position of power, and able to use all of my wealth (and whatever wealth he could use my power to take for himself), he became like a man who told a lie for so long that he began to believe it was true. He began to believe he was actually the duke. As a result of being my substitute, and acting as the royal duke in public with all the duke's rights and power, his ambition began to groware you listening?
Absolutely, so look after that handkerchief carefully.
[As LUCENTIO] I'll do you this favor for his sake, and to save your life in this dangerous situationindeed, you should consider yourself lucky that you resemble Sir Vincentio. You'll pretend to be him, assume his name and reputation, and stay at my house as a guest. Just make sure that you play your part well. Do you understand, sir? This way you can stay until you've done your business in the city. If this is kindness, then accept it.
And make yoursel a happy mother by doing so.
If he is dead, and we don't have a ruler, then we would hardly want the kingdom to continue this way, like a building without a roof, a country without a king is quickly ruined. With all your experience, we would look to you, and would appoint you to be our next king.
Who's there?
I swear I will.
Get out of here and go find my dog! And if you don't, I don't ever want to see you again. Go away, I say! Are you staying here to make me angry?
On record, my gracious lord.
Carthage?
No, not until Thursday. Theres enough time.
[To herself] She doesn't need to doubt your bravery, because she knows that you're a coward.
Oh stop, you're being too hard on yourself. Given the circumstances, I wholeheartedly wish this hadn't happened. But it has happened, so make the best of the situation.
I am always there for friends.
Yes, yes, my lord. Ill take you to him when he's asleep, then you can smash a nail into his head.
Good God. And well said! A joking bastard, ha! You are a blockhead. In good faith, it's day already. The Count will be here soon with musicians, for he said he would.  I hear him coming
You are welcome, sir! Before you depart, you'll have a wonderful time filled with many pleasures. Please, let's go inside!
Yes, Caliban, her son.
You make me glad. Im full of happiness. Lets have some fun. Will you sing the song you taught me a short while ago?
I'm listening and my heart is ready; the worst you can say is just loss on this earth. Tell me, is my kingdom lost? Well, it was my responsibility; and what loss is it to be rid of a burden? Does Bolingbroke want to take my throne? He can never be greater; if he serves God, we're both His servants. Do our subjects rebel against us? We can't fix that, since they betray God as well as us. Go ahead, speak of  despair, destruction, ruin and decay: the worst is death, and death will have his day.
Take all the comfort that such a dark night as this can offer, noble father-in-law. Tell me, how is my loving mother?
I am rid of him, and yet more men! Hate them, Timon, and eat your food.
Welcome, my son; who are the violets now that celebrate the new spring?
Open it! [They succeed in loosening the lid of the chest] Shh! I smell something sweet.
It is my soul that calls out my name. Lovers' voices at night sound silver-sweet, the most lovely music to lovers ears.
What's the reason for your awful shouting? What's the matter out there?
She calls out my name as if it were a bullet that had been shot from a gun and murdered her, just as I murdered her cousin. Tell me, Friar, in what vile part of my body does my name rest? Tell me, so I can cut it out of myself. [He draws his dagger]
Would there be no marriage among those he ruled?
I don't know. I found it in my bedroom, and I like the pattern on it. Before someone asks for it back, I want to have the pattern copied. Take it and do it, and leave me alone for a bit.
Anyone who calls me a traitor (unless he's a king, of course) is a liar.
How are you feeling now?
I can't find my coat.
Why Hearts Ease?
He can tell me not to do something that's wrong, but right now I'm doing the right thing. Unless he follows your example and locks me up for doing good, he can't be the boss of me.
I don't know who started it. We were all friends just a moment ago, as close as a bride and groom going to bed. But then, just now, as if some cosmic shift of the planets had affected them, they drew their swords and started lunging at each other in a bloody fight. I can't say what was the cause of it, and I wish I didn't have the legs that brought me here to take part in it.
Then you go ahead, and I will follow you.
I'm not talking to you.
How could I possibly understand what you're talking about?
Gracious Olivia
The empress, the midwife, and you: two can be silent when the third's gone. Go to the empress and tell her that.
Faithful friends and proven warriors, I've received letters from Rome telling me how much they hate the emperor and how eagerly they look forward to our arrival. So, great lords who are impatient with the wrongs done to you, however Rome has hurt you, make sure you repay it threefold.
There's nothing more than that. When you tell me the deed is done, I will love you and promote you for it.
Start a fire and get some food for these poor men. It's been a rough and stormy night.
Why, may I ask?
Because, when he swallowed me, I would have made a bunch of noise in his belly. I would have jangled all the bells so much that he wouldn't have left until he vomited up all the bells, steeple, church, and parish again. If King Simonides agreed with me
[To MALVOLIO] Alas, you poor fool, how they've humiliated you!
The blessings of earth, plentiful harvests, Always full barns and silos, Vines full of clustered grapes, Plants bending under the weight of their fruitMay spring followRight after the end of autumns harvest. Lack and poverty will never touch you. That is Ceres blessing for you.
Are you speaking from your heart?
Alas, what is that cry?
No, just unpin this for me here. That Lodovico is a good man.
She is yours and, as the saying goes, she's like you to a fault. [To the gentlemen] Behold, gentlemen. Though she might be a smaller version, she's an exact copy of her father: eyes, nose, mouth, his usual frown, his forehead, the cheek and chin dimples, his smile, the exact shape of his hand, fingers, and nails. Hermione's given birth to her husband's mini-me, and I guarantee you she has no doubt that her children are Leontes's!
All to you. More lights please!
It's very true.
Look, shes back from confession looking happier.
Then why arent our eyelids closing? Im not feeling tired at all.
Youre the kind of guy who walks into a bar, slaps his sword down on the table and says, I hope I dont have to use you. By the time hes having his second drink, he draws his sword on the bartender for no reason.
Well then, who will be her king?
I've had very little joy in being England's queen.
Where are the evil instigators of this fight?
Gentlemen, play some music here. I'll pay you for your trouble. Play a short song, and then say, "Good morning, general."
Unless it's for that then I cannot guess, my lord.
A husband? A devil!
Im not crazy; I know who you are. By my poor stump, these lines of blood, these lines of grief on my face, my exhausted days and heavy nights, and all my suffering, I know that youre our proud empress, mighty Tamora. Have you come for my other hand?
Go on ahead. I'll talk with this good fellow.
My lord, consider it done.
Here's a slut who doesn't know when to shut up, who just beat her husband and is now trying to trick me! This brat is not mine, it's Polixenes's. Get it out of here, and throw it and the bitch into the fire!
Good morning to you, sir.
Should dying men flatter those that live?
Well then, please take me to the queen.
Have I waited to see this morning for so long, only for it to look like this?
God bless you, sir!
Yes, sir. Some mischievous boys in the market square stole the other small dog from me. So then I offered her my own dog, who is as big as ten of yours. And therefore the gift was all the greater.
What do you want us to do, Andronicus?
I was just thinking that when we met. I hope things are not so bad that Timon has had to borrow more from his friends.
And tell me, how many tears were shed when you left him?
If you love him, sister, you can have him. I swear I'll even plead with him on your behalf.
Would anyone say "no" to that? Something incredible happens every time you blink! The longer we stay here, the less we'll see. Let's go.
Friends, can I beg for you to give me this armor? I recognize the marks; it belongs to a king who loved me, and I want to have it for his sake. Can I also ask you to lead me to the king's court? With this armor, I'll dress up like like a gentleman and, if I win and improve my bad luck, I'll pay you back for kindness. Until then, I owe you.
Great king, I present your deepest fear. Richard of Bordeaux, the greatest of your enemies, lies in this coffin, brought here by me.
This gentleman, a kinsman of the Prince and my friend, was killed while fighting on my behalf, to defend me against Tybalts insults. Tybalt, who has been my own kinsman for an hour! Oh, sweet Juliet, your beauty has made me effeminate and softened the steel of my valor.
Would you dare to kill a friend of mine?
Maybe you'll explode!
I've never tried it.
You may take my word, my lord. I know no man who can fairly praise more than what he likes: I count my friends' desires as my own. This is the truth. We'll see each other again.
Youve told us well; well do it. But wouldnt it be nice, good Andronicus, to send a message to your brave son Luciuswho is coming towards Rome with an army of Gothsand invite him to come for a banquet at your house? And when hes here at this feast, Ill bring the empress and her sons, the emperor himself, and all your enemies. Theyll kneel before you and beg for mercy, and you can do what you want with them. What do you think of this plan?
Ah, poor thing!
I can see in our sullen faces that all our hearts still wear the uniforms we served Timon in. We are still friends, serving him in sorrow. It is as if our boat had a leak and we were standing on the sinking deck, hearing the water rising all around us. We must all leave each other to drown in this imaginary sea.
Give me your hand, and let me see you in your woman's clothes.
Listen, daughter: princes, like the gods, should be generous to anyone who comes before them. Stingy princes are like gnats; they buzz around and everyone's glad when they're killed. So, to make Pericles's stay more enjoyable, what do you say we drink a toast of this wine to him to help cheer him up?
Are you going to Lord Timon's feast?
Truly, I can't, sir. The voyage I am determined to make is merely wandering without a destination. But I can tell that you're polite enough to not force me to tell you something I want to keep to myselfso it's only good manners for me to tell you what I can, Antonio. My name is Sebastian, though I called myself Roderigo. My father was Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you've heard of. He is dead now, but he left behind myself and my twin sister, who was born the same hour as me. If only God had allowed us to die in the same hour as well! But you, sir, kept that from happening, for my sister drowned an hour before you pulled me from the breaking waves.
My company is worth less than your good words. But who comes here?
A sad story's best for winter. I know one about ghosts and goblins.
[Sarcastically] Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'
Nah, none of those names suits me at all. I'm as honest as you are crazy and, all things considered, that's honest enough for anyone.
Proceed. No one will leave.
[To POLIXENES] Welcome, sir. My father has asked me to play hostess today.[To CAMILLO] You're welcome, too, sir. [To DORCAS] Give me those flowers, Dorcas . . .[To POLIXENES and CAMILLO] Gentlemen, here are some herbs for you that will stay green all winter long; rosemary and rue are a gift to symbolize grace and remembrance. And welcome to our shearing!
Well, I'll put it on, and I'll disguise myself in it. If only I was the first person to play the hypocrite while wearing a priest's robe.
Did you hear that Alcibiades is banished?
Hes a fine flower, absolutely, a flower.
Oh, what a bitter conclusion that Edward should still live as the "true, noble prince!" Cousin, you didn't use to be so stupid. Shall I speak plainly? I want the bastards dead, and I want it done immediately. What do you say now? Speak quickly, and be brief.
Well, well, he was the most secretive, hidden traitor that ever lived. Can you imagine, Lord Mayorif we hadn't been lucky enough to stop himthat sneaky traitor was plotting to murder me and the Lord of Gloucester in the council room today?
He's really taken our trick to heartit seems to have infected his very soul.
You stupid bumpkin! You bastard workhorse drudge! Didn't I tell you to meet me outside and bring these idiot rascals along with you?
Why, a horse.
They are; and Bolingbroke has imprisoned the wasteful king. Oh, it's a pity that he didn't manage his land as we take care of this garden! At this time of year, we harvest the sap from our fruit-trees, so they don't rot with over-sweetness; if he had done the same with his nobleman, they might have lived to produce the fruits of duty.  We cut away unnecessary branches, so that the more fruitful branches can live: if he had done so, he might still wear the crown which he has cast away by being so lazy and careless.
Yes.
Of course, if you love me, sir!
Yet ask.
I'll harp on it until my heartstrings break.
Why, I learned my scales long ago.
Go on.
I swear by heaven, I do not lie, I do not, gentlemen. [To OTHELLO] Oh, you murdering fool! How did such a fool as you get such a good wife?
When all the good manners are owned by just one or two men, and even those two are dirty, its a bad thing.
And so am I to you.
Good.
What, do you want my weapon, little lord?
Who, Mr. Syphilis?
Never trust me again if I don't. And by all means encourage the youth to answer the knight's challenge. An oxcart couldn't haul them close enough together to fight. As for Andrew, if you dissected him and found enough red blood in his liver for even a flea to notice, I'd eat the rest of his body. He's a coward through and through.
[To himself] Keep on working, my harmful medicine, keep on working! This is how gullible fools are tricked, and many trustworthy and chaste women, completely innocent, are punished in situations like this. [To OTHELLO] Hey! My lord! My lord! Othello!
We'll do it thensome dogs are good at playing catch.
[She gives BOULT a coin] Boult, spread the news in town about our new guest, and don't leave out a single detail. When Mother Nature put together this girl, she meant to do you a favor. If you tell everyone how beautiful she is, you'll get money and you'll get to sleep with her, too.
A dry one, sir.
Yes, leave that labor to great Herculesit's worse than all the other Twelve Labors put together.
[To himself] I can't change his mind; he's decided to leave. I could make this work to my advantage and keep him safe, all the while being loyal to him and to Polixenes. This could be my chance to see Leontes again, who I've wanted to see so much.
Do you want a love song or a drinking song?
[To RODERIGO] Goodbye. I must leave you now. It seems to me neither wise nor appropriate given my position in Othello's service to be brought forward against the Moorand it seems like I will be, if I stay here. Besides, I know that the government cannot get rid of him (even if this whole thing may annoy Brabantio), since he's needed so greatly to fight in the wars with Cyprus that are going on right now. And the government has no one else of his capability to lead their forces, not even if they should trade their own souls for someone. Although I do hate Othello as much as I hate the tortures of Hell, for the time being I must show signs of lovewhich, I assure you, are nothing more than empty signs. You go lead the search party to the Sagittary Inn, where you will surely find him. I'll be there with him. So goodbye.
Please, dear, come here.
I hope that a dew as evil as the one my mother used to gather from poison swamps and apply with a ravens feather will fall on top of you! May a hot wind from the southwest blow on you and cover you with blisters!
Go after her, go after her.
I wish we could fight this very hour.
Here comes the lords of Buckingham, and Derby.
Now, by all that's holy, here comes Katherina!
I follow all your thoughts. What do you want?
My only sin is my love for you.
Get him to bed, and make sure his wounds are tended to.
Hello, neighbors.
Madam, think of your son, the young prince, and be a careful mother. Send for him right away. Let him be crowned king. He is your hope for future peace of mind. Drown your desperate sorrows in dead Edward's grave, and plant your future joys in Prince Edward's new throne.
Tell me, heavenly rainbow, do you know if either Venus or her son Cupid are with the queen? Ever since the two of them plotted a way for Dis to steal from me my daughter Proserpina, I have sworn never to go near Venus or her blind son again.
There's my glove, then. Descend now and open your gates. Those who were enemies of Timon and me you will hand over. They, and no one else, will die. And to calm your fear of me, no man of mine shall go beyond an assigned area, or disturb the peace within the city. If they do they will have to answer to harsh punishment.
As we leave our friend, tossed into his grave, so too do those friends whose fortunes were tied to his now run away, leaving with him only their lies, like purses emptied by a pick-pocket. And the poor man will become a homeless beggar with his disease of poverty, walking alone in contempt. Look, here are more of our friends.
He's paid you all he owed you. He probably paid you too much, and you'll have to give something back.
Here comes someone in his night shirt, with a light and weapons.
I'm hurrying, Biondello. But they might need you at home, so you go back.
No.
Well, I'm glad I asked; that was a good dance. [To PERICLES] Here, sir, this lady needs a partner, too. I've heard you knights of Tyre are excellent dancers, and that you have a way of dancing with women, and that your rhythm is excellent.
He said he did lie
My estimate is conservative. Plus, he approaches at a great speed.
And I demean myself by paying you any attention.
Who stirred this old feud up again? Tell me, nephew. Were you around when the fight began?
My lord, he refuses to come.
My gracious lord
And what of all this?
I ask your grace to forgive me; its a letter of no importance, which for some reasons I don't want you to see.
It's nice.
Iago, look carefully around town, and calm down anyone who feels riled up after this awful fight. Come on, Desdemona, it's typical for a soldier to have his sleep interrupted by strife and turmoil.
Hmm, ha! [PERICLES hits MARINA]
Then you're not welcome here. I've already told you not to come by my house. I told you bluntly and honestly: my daughter is not for you. And now you come here in some kind of madness brought on by feasting and too many drinks, just to make trouble and ruin my good sleep?
The king is not at the palace. He went aboard a new ship to escape his sadness. Understand? The king is grieving.
Like a knight going into a tournament, the only advice or help I need is faithfulness and courage.[Reading the riddle from a scroll] I'm not a snake, but I eatMy own mother's flesh. When I looked for a husband, I found him in a father. He's father, son, and husband; I'm mother, wife, and child. How is this possible? I leave it up to you.[Looking back up] Oh, that last part is a bitter pill to swallow. Oh, you gods that see everything we do on earth, how can you look down on such a horrible thing (if what I'm reading is true)? [He grabs ANTIOCHUS's DAUGHTER's hand] Beautiful princess, I did love you,  and would still love you, but now I know the dark secret behind that pretty face. I have to tell you: all my plans are unravelling, because a good man could hardly marry into such a depraved situation once he knows what's in store. You're gorgeous and your character makes you even more desirable; under normal circumstances, anyone would be lucky to marry you, and the gods would smile down on it. But you've been violated so young; it's a crime worthy of hell. I'm not interested in you at all.
No, you said you'd be my boyfriend!So where are you going? Tell me, where?
[To MARINA] Come here for a minute. Good things are coming your way. Mark my words: you need to pretend you're afraid of having sex even though you're perfectly willing, and you need to seem like you don't want the money, even though you'll make a fortune. If you cry about having to work as a prostitute, your customers will take pity on you; pity equals good reviews, and good reviews equals a huge profit.
Well get revenge for it, dont you worry. Stop your weeping. Ill send a note to a certain man we know in Mantua, which is where that banished renegade Romeo is living. The man will poison Romeo so that Romeo will soon be keeping Tybalt company in death. And then, I hope, youll be satisfied.
Yes, and they look awfullike an unfashionable village schoolteacher. I've been stalking him like a murderer, and he's followed every instruction I gave in that letter I dropped. He smiles so much that his face has more lines in it than a map of the Indies. You've never seen anything like this. I can hardly keep from throwing things at him. I know my lady will get so annoyed she'll hit him eventually, and when she does, he'll just smile and imagine that she's flattering him.
Hell still end up hanged, even if every drop of water in the ocean swears he won't, and opens its mouth wide to try to swallow him.
You have a very convenient opportunity for it. He's doing some business with my lady right now, and he'll be leaving sooner or later.
Every day you play some trick on me, Iago. And it seems to me now that you are making things more difficult for me rather than giving me any advantage or hope of success. I won't tolerate this any longer, and as for what you've already done and what I've foolishly suffered because of you, I'm not just going to take it peacefully.
Come, come, my son, I'll bring you on your way: had I your youth and cause for anger, I would not stay.
He's in Florence now.
Here comes your father. Don't refuse my proposal. I must and will have Katherine for my wife.
And I would cheerfully, readily, and willingly die a thousand deaths if it would bring you peace.
He hasn't told us about that captain yet. When that's taken care of and the time is convenient, we will be married. Until then, sweet sister-in-law, we won't leave this place. Cesario, come here. You'll be Cesario to me while you're still a man, but when I see you in women's clothes, then you'll be Orsino's mistress, and his love's queen.
He has confessed that he has had sex with you.
What?
This is surely insanity.
It's better, then, that the gods should have her. Here she comes, crying over Lychorida's death. Are you ready?
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier; Sir Gilbert Talbot; your brother, Sir William Stanley; Oxford; the powerful Pembroke; Sir James Blunt; Rhys-ap-Thomas, with a brave crew; and many other famous and powerful men. They're now sending their armies straight to London, if they don't have to fight along the way.
I have a headache, here by my forehead.
My dear cousin, a beautiful target is usually the one that is hit fastest.
Then I definitely do not know you, because I never had an honest man around me. All those I kept around me were liars, because I wanted to serve meat to villains.
And you're a senator!
What did you say?
What a tragic day!
He has very bad manners. He says he'll speak to you whether you like it or not.
Weve had our lives completely taken from us by a bunch of drunken sailors. As for this bigmouthed rascal of a boatswain[To BOATSWAIN] I hope you drown ten times!
Should I gamble away my freedom at dice, and become your slave?
But what about your guilty conscience?
If the worst villain in the world said that, he'd be twice as evil just for saying so. But youyou've only made a mistake.
[To MARINA] Hurry up, now. [To the PIRATES] So, guys, you say she's a virgin?
Yes, if they were kept together and invested.
And may you prove, sir, to be a master of your art.
What would you say about me, if you had to praise me?
Now, princely Buckingham, seal this friendship by embracing my wife's allies, and through your unity make me happy.
Here comes more news.
Huntsman, take care of my hounds. Let Merriman restthe poor dog's exhausted. And leash Clowder with the bitch with the deep bark. Didn't you see how Silver picked up the trail at the hedge corner, when the scent was coldest? I wouldn't sell that dog for twenty pounds.
Sir, this is my destination for a week or two, but then I'll go on as far as Rome, and then to Tripoli, if God is willing.
He wasn't talking to you, Desdemona. He's busy reading the letter. Is there really a dispute between my lord and Cassio?
You need a crutch! Why are you calling for a sword?
I pray we have a quick journey! Camillo, we're off to the seaside.
Fire and brimstone!
If Tamora asks him, then he will. For I can smooth things over and fill his ear with golden promises. Even if his heart were hard as stone and his old ears deaf, both his heart and his ears would obey my words. [To AEMILIUS] You, go ahead of me and be our ambassador. Tell Lucius that the emperor requests a meeting with him at the house of his father, old Andronicus.
Look!
If we don't live to cry again, that'll be bad luck, considering how good we have it now.
What should I do? I admit it's embarrassing to be so in love, but I can't help it.
Perhaps she chose it for love of Lucius's mother.
Sir, shes human. But by God's blessing, shes mine. I chose her to be my wife when I couldn't ask my father for his advice, and in fact no longer thought I had a father. Shes the daughter of this famous Duke of Milan, about whom I had heard such good things but had never seen before. I've been given a second life from him, and marrying her makes him a second father to me.
I dont know. And he refuses to tell me.
Here's payment for the work you owe me. Now go!
Oh, poor duke! His task is like counting the sands or drinking an ocean dry; where one fights for him, thousands will fly to the other side. Goodbye at once, for once, forever.
[To QUEEN MARGARET] See, you've only cursed yourself.
You will be his eunuch, and I will be your mute attendant. If I tell your secret, may I lose my sight.
Where do you come from, sir?
It's no use; he won't speak to you.
Next thing you know, hell be saying widower Aeneas. Good Lord, how can he interpret the story in that way?
A virtuous young woman, the daughter of a count who died a year ago. He left her in the care of his son, Olivia's brother, but the brother died soon after. They say that out of love for her brother, Olivia has stopped interacting with men altogether.
[Panting] These men have even taken my breath away. They call themselves creditors? They are devils!
And let his armor rust until today on purpose, before he wears it in the tournament.
I'll hunt with him, and make sure he is not received into our home without fair compensation.
Tell me, Uncle Richard: if my brother comes, where will we stay until my coronation ceremony?
My memories seem distant and far away, more like a dream than something that I can be sure really happened. Didnt I have four or five women who took care of me?
News from Verona! How are you, Balthasar? Have you brought me a letter from the friar? How is my wife? Is my father well? How is my Juliet? I ask that again because nothing can be bad if she is well.
Oh, what a sad day!
Let me ask you a question: what do you think of my daughter, sir?
Yes, my good lord, it does contain a king; King Richard is inside those lime and stone walls, and with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury, Sir Stephen Scroop, and a clergyman whose name I can't find out.
Why, tell me though, isn't this my daughter's tutor Cambio?
We'll say goodbye in a week, and after that I won't argue any more.
Why?  Why on earth are you asking me this?
What? Adulterous sex with me?
What do you mean, "wears the garland?" Do you mean the crown?
I know too well how strongly a woman can love a man. Really, their hearts are as true as ours are. My father had a daughter who loved a man just as strongly as I might love you, if I were a woman.
Aha! Why do you wish that?
Know him? Yes.
[Singing] Oh no, no, no, no, don't you dare.
If she had that power, she'd be justified in doing so.
Hello, good man! Do you want to speak with us?
Yes, traitor.
Did you see the king today, Lord Stanley?
Well goodbye, gentleman. Give me your hands. We must dine together sometime soon.[To the JEWELER] Sir, your jewel has gotten too much praise!
Master, I think we both had the same idea at the same time.
I dont, sir.
The ground is bloody. Search the graveyard. Go, a few of you, and arrest anyone you find.
Lord Mayor
Boult, take her away. Do whatever you like with her. Smash her virginity into pieces so we can mold the rest into whatever shape we want.
[To the FIRST MURDERER] What should we do?
That's true, but I was born a gentleman before my father. You see, the king's son took me by the hand, called me "Brother," and then the two kings called my father "Brother." And then the prince my brother and the princess my sister called my father "Father," and we all cried. Those were the first gentlemanly tears that we ever cried.
Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio Petruchio.Get up, Grumio, get up. We will settle this argument.
[Whispering] Her C's, her U's, and her T's. Why only mention those?
By heaven, I think the only people who are safe are the queen's relatives, and the secret messengers who travel between the king and his mistress, Jane Shore. Didn't you hear how Lord Hastings had to beg Miss Shore in order to get released?
Let me have free access to reach them, and soon you won't have to fear them anymore.
Me too, and to promise him something in the future.
I won't ever begin if I shut my mouth.
I know the knight is furious with you, even to the degree of wanting a fight to the death, but I don't know any more details.
I've got news, lads. Our war is over! The storm has battered the Turkish fleet so badly that their attack has been halted. A noble Venetian ship has seen most of the Turkish fleet shipwrecked and in trouble.
First of all, my horse is tired, and my master and mistress have had a falling out.
Hes dead.
See how this ring encircles your finger. In the same way, my poor heart is enclosed inside your chest. Wear both of them, for both of them are yours. And if I, your poor devoted servant, can ask for one small favor from your gracious hand, then you'll guarantee my happiness forever.
Ah, Juliet, if youre as happy as I am, and youre better with words, tell me about the happiness you imagine well have in our marriage.
Yes, totally rejected.
Yes, and this.
Love performed these miracles. Bianca's love made me trade my identity with Tranio, while he pretended to be me in town. And now at last I've arrived happily at the blissful conclusion of my endeavors. Whatever Tranio did, I commanded him to do. So pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
Amen, amen. But whatever sorrow comes, it couldnt overwhelm the joy I feel from a single look at her. If you join our hands with holy words, then love-devouring death can do whatever it wants. Its enough for me if I can just call her mine.
Hello and God bless you, sir.
Boy, these words dont excuse the injuries youve done to me. Turn and draw your sword.
Praise Apollo!
How are you, my king? There are a few men who were on your ship that are still missinga few odd boys that you don't remember.
Nine oclock.
Though I'm satisfied and don't need to know anything more than I already know, the oracle will put other people's minds at ease, especially those ignorant nonbelievers who can't stomach the truth. I decided it was a good idea to keep Hermione in prison so that she didn't try to escape like Polixenes and Camillo. Come on, follow me. I'm going to speak publicly, since news of this ordeal is bound to have spread.
[To TRINCULO] Here, swear, and tell me how you escaped the wreck.
What is the matter? What is going on, general?
Isnt that the perfect sauce for a sweet goose?
Stay away from her for a while. Be patient. While you were overwhelmed by your griefa passionate feeling you are prone toCassio was here. I sent him away and made some excuse for your fit of passion. I told him to come back here and speak with me, and he promised to do so. Hide nearby and watch the sneers and visible expressions of scorn all over his face, as I ask him to tell me again about where, how, how often, how long ago, and when he has slept and will again sleep with your wife. Just watch his expression. Please, be patient, or else you'll show that you are completely ruled by your emotions and not a real man.
Well, give me that part of it.[To the SHEPHERD'S SON] Are you a part of this business?
No, I won't really dare to swear it.
That he's not offended with any man here. If he were, he would have shown it in his face.
Gentleman, what are you doing up so early?
For all I know, my lord, they do.
And the same to you, my good Lord Chamberlain. Welcome back to the open air. How have you tolerated imprisonment?
That last is right. The rest I had was sweeter than sleep.
No, truly, sir, I've never said grace in my life.
[To RICHARD] May I weigh down your soul tomorrow! It's me, poor Clarence, who was drowned to death in a barrel of sickening wine, betrayed by your plotting. Remember me tomorrow in the battle, and let your blunted sword fall from your hand. Despair, and die!
How many women would carry such a message? Ah, poor Proteus! You have employed a fox to be the shepherd of your lambs. Oh, I am a poor fool! Why do I pity the man who hates me with his heart? Because he loves her, he hates me.  And because I love him, I have to feel sorry for him. I gave him this ring when we said goodbyeto make him promise to remember me. And now I am an unhappy messenger, who has to ask for the picture that I don't want to get; to carry the ring which I should have refused; to praise his faithwhich I should have said bad things about. I am my master's truly-confirmed love. But I cannot be a true servant to my master, unless I betray myself. Yes, I will woo Silvia for him. But I'll do it coldly since I don't want him to succeed, as heaven knows.
Give it to me! Dont talk to me about fear.
No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff than that.
I found this on my tent this morning.
Well, take it, then, and may the gods bless you!
And as for Cassio, let me handle him. You'll hear more about it by midnight.
What, are my own doors going to shut themselves to me? Am I not free to leave my own house? Does the home to such great parties turn its back on me, like everyone else?
I think you're right, and in the morning I will ask the virtuous Desdemona to plead on my behalf. But I worry for my fortunes if they hold me back.
But it's unpleasant to hear women being willful.
Im hurt. May a plague strike both your families. Im done. Did he get away without injury?
I thank you, sir.
I carried the dog to Mistress Silvia like you asked me to, sir.
Christ! You scoundrel! You rascal!
I will.
I daresay he doesn't lie anywhere.
Let's go look for him. We would do wrong to our own prosperity if we were to arrive to late to such an opportunity.
[Giving him money] I understand you sir. You're pretty good at begging.
I'd be glad to.
She won't.
Good madam, let me speak, and don't let any quarreling cast a shadow over the surprised joy of these happy couples, which I have been amazed by. To avoid any fighting, I'll confess that Toby and I were the ones who tricked Malvolio here, because of the arrogant and rude behavior we had observed in him. Maria only wrote the letter at Sir Toby's urgent request, and he has rewarded her for it by marrying her. The whole practical joke should inspire laughter instead of revenge, especially if we consider that both sides injured each other equally.
Who have you done? This is cruel and unnatural!
All these traits make her even worse.
Where King Smalus rules, feared and loved by all?
My lord
Timon
If I colonized this island, my lord
Why do the emperor's trumpets make that sound?
No, I'll see you safely to the church, and then I'll hurry back to my master's.
No, no, let Rape and Murder stay with me. Or else Ill call my brother back again, and Ill count on Lucius to take revenge for me.
That would be nice of us, but hardly politically sensible.
Head and butt! A clever person would say your butting head had horns.
[To SEBASTIAN so that only he can hear] Lets do it tonight, because the men are so exhausted from traveling. They won't, or can't, be as careful as they are when they have more energy.
His nurse? Why, she was dead before you were born.
Call me superstitious, but I'm going to kneel and ask for her blessing. [PERDITA kneels in front of HERMIONE]Ma'am, you died just when I was born. Let me kiss your hand. [PERDITA moves to kiss HERMIONE's hand]
She'll reject the duke. She won't marry anyone who's above her social rank, her wealth, her age, or her intelligenceI've heard her swear this. So cheer up, you're still in the running, man.
If you need a little room to pray, I'll allow it, but don't take too long. The gods might listen, you know, and I swore I'd do my job quickly.
Youre leaving? Its not yet close to daytime. The sound you just heard was a nightingale, not a lark. Each night the nightingale sings on that pomegranate tree. Believe me, my love, it was the nightingale.
The greatest thing you lack is brought about by your great desire to eat a lotwhy else would you feel poor? Look here, the earth has roots, and within a mile are a hundred springs. The oaks have nuts, the briers red berries. Nature is a generous housewife, who gives a great meal on each bush. Poor! How could you feel poor?
Father, you like bragging about me even when I don't deserve it.
[Watching FLORIZEL and PERDITA] He's telling her something that makes her blush. Just look how fair her skin is!
If I do so, it will be worth more if I say it behind your back than if I say it to your face.
Here it is set plain: I love the beautiful daughter of rich Capulet. I love her, and she loves me. Were bound together, and need only for you to combine us completely by marrying us. In good time Ill tell you about when and where and how we met, how we wooed each other and vowed our love. But  now I pray that you will agree to marry us today.
Well, "some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them." I was a member of this farce as well, pretending to be a priest named Sir Topas, but what does that matter? [Imitating MALVOLIO] "By God, fool, I am not mad."But do you remember what else he said? "Madam, why do you laugh at such an empty-headed villain? If you don't laugh at him, he can't think of anything to say." And sowhat goes around comes around.
That's a nice moral. It means that he's currently down and out but hopes that, by marrying you, he'll be on his way to a better fortune.
Every person on the ship was like a madman and did desperate things. Everyone except the sailors jumped into the rough sea to escape the ship that I had set on fire. The kings son, Ferdinand, with his hair standing straight uplooking like reeds instead of hairwas the first one who jumped, shouting, Hell is empty, and all the devils are here!
[Seeing ALONSO and kneeling] Though the seas threaten us sometimes, they are merciful because they let you survive. I was wrong to curse them.
A hundred then.
I pray to heaven that he is upset over some government matter, as you think is the case, and not over some jealous idea about you.
Yes, I swear.
Quiet for a second, and listen up. Remember how quickly she fell in love with the Moor, all over some bragging and made-up fantastical stories. Do you think she still loves him now for talking? Don't think this for a second. She wants something nice to look at, and she won't get that with the devil Othello. When she gets bored with having sex, she'll need to find something to inflame her passion againsomeone good-looking, closer to her age, and more like her in behavior and appearance. She'll find none of this in the Moor. Without any of these desirable things, she'll get so sick of the Moor she'll want to throw up. Her very nature will compel her to find a second man. Now, sir, given all this obvious information, who do you think she will turn to if not Cassio? He's eloquent, and puts up a facade of good manners to hide his real desires. She'll choose no one but him. He's a tricky, opportunistic villain, who takes advantage of situations. He's a devilish fool. And besides, this scoundrel is handsome, young, and has everything that foolish young women look for in a man. He's an awful and complete rascal, and Desdemona's already found him.
Well, there's no way for her to get experience except by getting experience.  Here comes Lord Lysimachus in a disguise.
[To the gentlemen] Traitors! Why aren't you forcing her out? Give her the bastard.[To ANTIGONUS] You old fart! Your wife is the boss of you, you're completely whipped! Pick up the bastard. I said pick it up! Give it to your hag of a wife.
Earlier that that, sir, if that's what I am now.
Here, wear this locket for me. My picture is inside. Don't refuse it, please. Unlike me, it has no voice to upset you with. And I beg you to come again tomorrow. What could you ask of me that I would deny, as long as I can retain my honor in giving it?
Yes, lie down and roar with grief, since you have killed the sweetest innocent girl that ever lived.
Just as I said. Look, here he comes. No exotic plant or herb, nor any sleeping medicine in the world, will return to you that sweet restful sleep you enjoyed just yesterday.
Villain, what have you done?
I'm surprised that your ladyship enjoys the company of such an empty-headed villain. The other day I saw him lose a battle of wits to an ordinary idiot who had no more brains than a stone. Look at him now, he's without a witty retort already. Unless you laugh and give him an opportunity, he can't think of a thing to say. I declare that the so-called wise men who laugh so hard at these jesters' well-rehearsed routines are no better than jesters' assistants themselves.
What? Whos calling me?
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Oh, no reason. I was just curious.
They are spirits that I've called out from their dwellings to perform my current fantasy, all through my magic.
About $6,000 immediately, and everything I have in the future.
Look! Who's that?
Give them my best, and tell them that, to ease their sadness, their fear of war, their pains, their losses, their pangs of love, and all the other difficulties common to life, I send some kindness their way. I'll teach them how to defend themselves against the wild Alcibiades's wrath.
Just half an hour!
[To the attendants so that only they can hear]The king is angry. See how he bites his lip.
And I love to see this great lord bow to us and send us gifts.
Let Saint George and my innocence make me successful!
What?
Was it?
What do you think of his belief?
Young, honorable, Alcibiades, when your grievances were just an idea, before you had any power and we had any fear of it, we sent assistance to you to apologize for our ingratitude with endless admiration.
And you, philosopher!
I think that you haven't actually tried patience, which has helped me get through a similar loss and find eventual happiness.
He'll suffer horribly, but so will his family and everyone within fifty degrees of relation to him. They'll all be hanged; it's a pity, but it's necessary. Can you believe some old shepherd was grooming his daughter to catch a prince? Some say he'll be stoned to death, but I say that's too lenient for someone who almost ruined our prince! No punishment is too harsh for him.
We can make out, on the opposite shore, a large group of ships sailing this way.
[Offstage] Oh, my good lord, I want to have a word with you!
Indeed it is.
Cambio has become Lucentio.
We learned the tune of it a month ago.
No, I don't think that's a good idea, good madam. Forgive me.
Im going to laugh myself to death at this foolish monster. A disgraceful monster. I could find it in my heart to beat him
He called her "whore." A drunken beggar wouldn't call his girl such a name.
[To BIANCA] What, are you looking pale? Someone carry him off.
What, are you awake or asleep?
[Mimicking TRINCULO's voice] You lie. You cant do that.
I'll help you, Sir Toby. They'll bandage us up together.
I swear that I will never go back on this exchange of love and friendship.
Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, hey!
He has the noblest mind any man has ever had.
Alas, what sin have I committed without knowing about it?
Sir, Ill be hanged if hes your man, in your servant's uniform. Walk out into a field and hell chase you. Thats the only sense in which you can call him your man.
Not so fast, sir; I came to help him get to sleep. It's people like you, yes-men who encourage his delusional fantasies, that are keeping him awake. I came to tell him something so true that it'll work like medicinemy honesty will cure the disease that keeps him from sleeping.
The devil is speaking through him.
You know I have the power to kill you.
What will you give us?
And be brief too, good mother, for I'm in a hurry.
Keep whoring around. Those who use you don't love you, so you might as well give them diseases, because they give you their lust. Use these dirty hours well and prepare these villains for tubs and baths. Bring those bright youths down to their rightful place, trying to cure their venereal diseases with diets and salt-baths.
No, you're a liar. It's the blessed sun.
[To MIRANDA] This is strange. Some strong feeling has deeply upset your father.
Truly, I can't.
What are you saying? Have you lost your mind?
Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed! Why did you come now, Death, to murder, murder our joy? Oh child! Oh child! My soul and not my child! You are dead! No! My child is dead. My child will be buried together with my joy.
How long have you been in this profession?
No, this turtledove will catch a buzzard.
[Singing]I called my love false love, but what did he say then?Sing willow, willow, willow.If I court more women, you'll sleep with more menOkay, you can go now, good night. My eyes itch. Does that mean I'm going to cry?
Indeed, God forbid that he should say no to us!
Are you in the service of the Lady Olivia, friends?
Stop, lieutenant! Sir MontanoGentlemen, are you out of your minds? Have you forgotten your sense of duty? Stop! The general is talking to you. Stop, for shame!
Words are useless breath, like lawyers pleading on their sad clients' behalf; like the children of joys who inherit nothing; like poor speech-makers going on about misery. Even so, let them have a chance. Though they won't help in any other way, they still help ease the heart.
My dear son, youre too familiar with suffering. I do have news for you about the Princes punishment for you.
Happy or sad?
Listen, listen! I hear, the song of the strutting rooster who cries cock-a-doodle-doo.
James Tyrrel, your most obedient subject.
Now, Sir Petruchio, how's it going with my daughter?
No, sir. His fury comes from a very real insult you gave him. So go ahead and give him what he wants. You won't be allowed to go back into the house unless you want to fight me, and if you're going to do that you might as well fight him instead. So go on to the garden, or else draw your sword right now. There's no way you're going to avoid a fight today, unless you want to give up your title as a gentleman and swear that you'll never carry a sword again.
No, Cassio is not killed.
What, are you crazy? I order you to go back home.
But wait, here come the gardeners: let's hide in the shadow of these trees. Oh, God, I bet they'll talk about politics, for everyone does when they expect a change in government; sorrow is a sign that there's more sorrow to come.
Now your lips have cleaned the sin from mine.
Take up the sword again, or else take me.
Draw your swords, if youre men. Gregory, get ready to slash them.
By God, he must die! I had forgotten about the reward.
Most mighty king, a powerful navy is sailing to our western coast. Many weak, unreliable allies of ours have gathered at the shore to meet the shipsbut they are unarmed and undecided about whether or not to fight them. It's thought that Richmond is the invading navy's admiral. Right now the ships are just drifting around offshore, waiting for Buckingham to welcome them to land.
Nothing but this: give your true love to my master.
And you, good sir. Please tell me, don't you have a daughter named Katherina, who is fair and virtuous?
[Whispering] My God!
I'm glad to hear this, because now I can show my love for you and fulfill my duty in a more frank manner. So, hear what I must tell you. I don't have any proof yet. But keep an eye on your wife, and watch her carefully with Cassio. Look at her like this: don't be too jealous or too trusting. I wouldn't want you to get taken advantage of because of your noble, kind nature. Look out. I know the people of my country well. Women of Venice let God see the sorts of exploits they wouldn't dare let their husbands see. Their conscience doesn't stop them from doing bad things, but only keeps them from letting their bad deeds be known.
I know it, uncle,  and would not oppose myself against the will of heaven. But who's here now?
It's the same with me and my son. Well, Mamillius and I will walk along and leave you two to more serious business. Hermione, you can show your love for me by giving Polixenes a warm welcome. Let him have what is expensive in Sicily for a small price. Next to you and our son, he's the person I care about the most.
What luck  Thick-lips has, if he can pull off what he's trying to do.
My daughter! Oh, my daughter!
Beautiful girl, Ill be neither of those things, if you dislike them.
And what does she say to my pretty little dog?
I'm not accusing them.
In the face of banishment, let philosophy be hanged! Unless philosophy can create a Juliet, move an entire town to a new place, or reverse a princes punishment, it cant help me. Stop talking.
Hail, worthy Timon, and all those who enjoy his bounty. All five of the senses acknowledge you as their patron, and that they come here freely to pay homage to you and your great wealth. Yes, hearing, taste touch, and smell, all the senses have enjoyed what you offer. Now it is time to feast your eyes!
I swear, you are a generous man. These wise men who give fools money will earn themselves a good reputationafter fourteen years of payments.
Welcome, gentlemen. All the ladies who arent suffering from corns on their feet will dance with you. Ha ha! My ladies, now which of you will refuse to dance now? If any of you acts shyly, Ill swear she has corns. Have I hit the mark? Welcome, gentlemen. Once there was a time when I could wear a mask and charm a girl by whispering a story in her ear. No more, no more, no more. You are welcome gentlemen. Come, musicians, play. [Music plays and they dance] Make room in the hall! Make room! Dance, girls.
And more too!
Didnt you just say that he lied?
Titus, I've come to talk with you.
Now here comes the Duke of York, right on time.
Worse and worse. She will not come! Oh, it's vile, intolerable, not to be endured!Grumio, go to your mistress. Say that I command her to come to me.
Oh, but I worked so hard memorizing it, and it's poetic.
Yes, but it's not yet time for me to die!
Carry him gently off to bed, and have everyone in position for when he wakes up.
When Biondello comes, he must wait on you like you're his master. But first I'll persuade him to keep all this a secret.
My master is getting angry. If I knock him first, then I know who's going to end up sorry for it.
Read this list while we wait for the mirror.
Richard!
[So only HORTENSIO can hear] Hortensio, tell the tailor that you'll make sure he gets paid.
Well, follow me, guys. You'll get your money shortly. [To BAWD] Wife, take her in. Teach her what she has to do so she's not caught unawares her first time.
Are you busy? Do you need my help?
I never did you any harm.
You're one of those who thinks a little birdie is going to fly to Tarsus and tell Pericles what happened! I'm ashamed to think of what a coward you are, and a king, too.
And don't ever let the name "Tranio" slip out. "Tranio" is now "Lucentio."
But the wrong is just a wrong in the world, so if the world is yours, then it is a wrong in your own world. And then you could quickly make it right.
Don't let my cool response make me seem less passionate. A war of words, like the chatter of two gossipy women, won't resolve this dispute; blood must be spilled before this is over. But I am not so patient that I can listen to these insults and say nothing in return. First, respect for your highness stops me from speaking freelyif I could, I wouldn't stop until I'd shoved those terms of treason back down his throat. Leaving aside his royal blood and pretending he's not your cousin I defy him, spit at him, and call him a lying coward and a villain: which to prove I would give him time to run, and then follow him even to the frozen mountains of the Alps, or any other inhabitable ground where an Englishman has ever set foot. In the meantime, let this prove my loyalty: by everything I hold dear, he's a false liar.
He wouldn't stay when you asked. It's like the more you pushed, the more he was convinced his business was more important.
You speak well.
[So only the TAILOR can hear] Tailor, I'll pay you for your gown tomorrow. Don't take his rudeness to heart. Go then, I say. Give my regards to your master.
By nothingbecause this is no proper oath. Your Saint George, profaned by you, has lost his lordly honor. Your garter, stained by you, has lost its knightly virtue. Your crown, stolen by you, has disgraced its kingly glory. If you want to swear by something that I might believe in, then swear by something that you haven't wronged.
My lords, a messenger from Rome is here asking to see you.
Im not some wondrous being, sir. Im definitely a girl.
She thanks you.
Come here, Catesby. Spread around a rumor that my wife Anne is very sick. I will make arrangements for keeping her locked up. And find me some poor gentleman whom I can marry straight away to Clarence's daughter. Clarence's son is an idiot, so I'm not afraid of him. But look at you daydreaming! I say again: spread the rumor that Anne, my queen, is sick and likely to die. Hurry upit's very important that I destroy anything that might come to damage me.
Your wit is a bitter apple. It is a very spicy sauce.
He's the worst! What a jerk! He hangs around funerals, fairs, and public events.
Who's there? Othello?
It would be impossible for the King of Sicily to be too kind to the King of Bohemia. They went to school together when they were kids and became really close, though, naturally, they've grown apart since. Once they reached adulthood and were crowned as kings, they had to attend to business in their respective countries. Though they haven't been able to meet in person, they've exchanged gifts and letters and have sent servants on their behalf. They haven't really been together, of course, but it's as if they were shaking hands or hugging from opposite sides of the globe. God bless their friendship!
I can't speak as well as he does; not at all, and my words' meaning couldn't be better than his. But our thoughts are one and the same.
What do you have to give to him?
Well, there you have it, then. Even though she was a young woman, she was so good at lying that she made her father as blind as a tree to her plans. He even thought you'd used witchcraft on her. But I'm partially to blame for saying this. I beg your pardon for loving you too much.
except that the poor monster is drunk. A repulsive monster!
I hope to go to heaven, too, lieutenant.
Rude dog, halt when I command you to! And raise your weapon so it isn't pointing at my chest, or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike you down and trample on you for your boldness, you beggar.
Why, here is the order as evidence.
This was the game, my lord; when Publius shot his arrow, Taurus butted heads with Aries, and both the rams horns fell down into the court. And who should find them but the empress's villain? She laughed, and told the Moor he should give them to the emperor as a present.
Hello, sir! Sir, will you listen to me?
Please, walk quietly, so that not even a blind mole would hear our feet touch the ground. We are now near his hut.
If I loved you with my master's passionwith such suffering and a life that is like deathyour rejection would make no sense to me. I would not understand it.
If the duke keeps favoring you like this, Cesario, you're likely to get promoted very high. He's only known you for three days, and already he's treating you like a friend.
Fair enough.
You're running away from the teaching that might have saved you. [To the FOOL] Let's go together to Lord Timon's.
Spout my nonsense? He must have heard that word used by some great man and now he applies it to a jester. Spout my nonsense! This foolish world, it turns out, is an effeminate dandy. Now please abandon your strange behavior and tell me what I should "spout" to my lady. Should I spout to her that you're coming?
Today, my lord. For three months before that we spent every day and night together without a break.
I am their aunt by marriage, but I love them like a mother. Bring me to see them. I'll take your office upon myself, Lieutenantand take all the blame as well.
Well, sir, with needle and thread.
Is everything ready for the royal event?
No, Romeo will respond to the letter writer and accept the challenge.
Fair cousin, you shouldn't shame your knee by kneeling on the ground. I'd rather that my heart feel you love than my eye see this sign of respect. Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I knowthis high[points to crown]at least, although your knee is low.
What about the one over there, who wouldnt dance?
No.
No, no. Listen; I'm not interested in brothels anymore. Should we go hear the nuns sing?
An animal, the same as you! Damn you for showing me again the eyes of a human!
I must confess that your offer is the best. If your father will second your guarantees, then she's yours. Otherwise, you must pardon meif you should die before your father does, then what would become of all the wealth Bianca is supposed to inherit from you?
Well, now I've done a good day's work. You must all maintain this unity and friendship. Every day I expect a messenger of God to bear me away from here, and I can leave for heaven in peace now that my friends have made their peace on earth. Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand. Don't just hide your hatred under a facade of friendship. Swear your love for each other.
Where is the Master, Boatswain?
Stay, then. Ill go alone. Now Im frightened. Oh, Im very worried something terrible and unfortunate has happened.
Sir, I may be careless, stupid, and afraid, but nobody's perfect. Carelessness, stupidity, and fear are just part of being in the world; you can't avoid them. As long as I've worked for you, sir, any time I messed up, it was because I was stupid. If I acted stupidly, it's because I made a mistake and didn't think it through. If I were ever so afraid to do something, so afraid I couldn't control the consequences that I wasn't able to carry it out, well, that's a fear even the smartest people have to deal with. But, sir, I'm begging you to be straight with me. Tell me to my face how I messed up. If I deny it, then you'd better believe I didn't do it.
I had planned to go to Tarsus and wage war on Cleon, but I have to do something else first. Turn the sails toward Ephesus. I'll tell you why soon.[To LYSIMACHUS] Can we rest and get provisions, sir, in Mytilene? We can pay you in gold for everything that we need.
Because she's the chosen beloved of Sir Hortensio.
Then why do you weep so often, and beat your chest, and cry, "Oh, Clarence, my unlucky son?"
Good morning, cousin.
[To STEPHANO] Please, let me show you where you can catch crabs to eat. Ill dig with my long fingernails to find you peanuts. Ill show you a birds nest with eggs inside, and teach you how to catch a quick-moving monkey. Ill lead you to clusters of hazelnuts, and sometimes Ill catch seagulls for you on the rocks. Will you come with me?
What? Do what I say, or else.
What a motley fool he is! You are a wretched fool! Please, your Highness, punch him a few times and take his wine bottle away from him. When he doesn't have that, hell drink nothing but salt waterbecause I won't show him where the freshwater springs are.
This is some four-legged monster of the island, who seems to have some kind of fever, as far as I can tell. How the devil did he learn our language? But since he does, I'll try to give him some relief from his pain. If I can get him better, tame him, and get him back to Naples, hed be a perfect present to give to any emperor who's ever worn shoes.
You are an ordinary friend that's without faith or love. And such a friend is now a treacherous man! You have deceived my hopes: nothing could have persuaded me about that except for witnessing your behavior firsthand. Now I won't dare to say that I have only one friend that's alivebecause you would prove me wrong. Who should be trusted, when one's closest friend is a liar? Proteus, I am sorry I must never trust you again, but consider you a stranger. The personal wound is the deepest one. Oh, what an awful moment! Its terrible when a friend should be the worst among your enemies.
Dear Cleon, I have to go. My year is up and the state of peace in Tyre is fragile. Thanks for everything you and your wife have done for me. May the gods bless you.
[Shows the letter]Read this, and youll know about the treason that Im too out of breath to explain.
This has something to do with the odd path of the moon. It is closer to the earth than normal, and this makes men crazy.
Well I'll be a sinner then, and a double-dealer. Here's another. [Giving him another coin]
[Seeing the clothes] Oh, King Stephano! Oh, worthy Stephano, look at the clothes hanging here for you!
I'm surprised Cambio hasn't come by all this time.
Thank you all. You won't regret my return.
[To LUCENTIO] Sir, to be successful you need to get her father's approval as well as Bianca's love. To make this happen, as I explained to your worship, I will find a manit doesn't really matter what kind of man; I'll make him suit our purposeswho can pretend to be "Vincentio of Pisa," and he can offer Baptista even greater sums of money than I already promised. And so you can get what you want without any trouble, and marry sweet Bianca with her father's consent.
Why noshe's broken the lute on me. All I told her was that she was using the wrong frets, and I bent her hand to teach her the right fingering. Then she jumped up with impatience and said, "'Frets,' is that what you call them? Let me fret you then!" And with that she struck me on the head, so that my head went right through the lute. I stood there confused for a while, looking through the strings of the lute as if they were prison bars, while she called me a "rascal fiddler," "twangling fool," and twenty other hateful names like that. It was as if she'd been practicing and planning to abuse me like this.
Dearly, my lovely Ariel. Dont come until you hear me call for you.
The most remarkable queen that's ever been there.
Say again, you three are assistants to the money-lenders?
Camillo, that would basically be a miracle, but how can we do it? You would be a superhero and I'd never doubt you again.
Marcus, my brother! Sad Titus is calling for you.
Such passionate joys have violent endings. They die in their moment of triumph, just like a spark and gunpowder destroy themselves in an explosion once they touch. Even the most delicious honey is loathsome when youve had too much, and takes away your appetite. Loving in moderation is therefore the key to long-lasting love. Going too fast is as bad as going too slow.
[To AUTOLYCUS] Good to see you, sir. You chose not to fight with me the other day because I wasn't a gentleman. See these clothes? Can you look at these and still think I wasn't born a gentleman? You might as well say these clothes weren't born gentlemen! Call me a liar. Tell me I wasn't born a gentleman.
If she is a liar, heaven has played a trick on itself. I won't believe it.
[To herself] May God defend me! Whatever insignificant insult I committed will now reveal just how unmanly I am.
God forbid! I've given him no reason to be jealous.
[To ABRAHAM] Yes, my master is better than yours, sir.
Oh, my lord, beware of jealousy! It is a green-eyed monster that mocks whoever it eats away at. A man who knows for sure that his wife is cheating on him lives in bliss, since he knows not to love his wife. But, oh, what torture it is to love but doubt your wife, suspect her of something but still love her.
"Truly!" You can keep putting me off with promises, but even if you swore by all the stars in the sky, I'd still say, "Sir, you're staying." Truly, you can't leavea woman's "truly" is as strong as a man's. Are you still intent on leaving? You'll force me to keep you as a prisoner rather than as a guest. Instead of thanking me, you'll have to pay your fees when you leave. What do you say to that? Will you be my prisoner, or my guest? Judging by your oh-so-serious "truly," you'll have to be one of them.
How has the noble Timon fallen to this place?
Youll be lord of the island, and Ill serve you.
Are you sure about that?
Let me see. But this is the ring I gave to Julia!
Look, my gentle wife was woken up by this! I'll make an example out of you, Cassio.
Honest good men, yes. Put them away, away. As you know, this is a sad case.
I met with a messenger friend of mine who, despite having argued with me in public, held a strong love for me and approached me like the old friend he is. He was riding from Alcibiades to Timon with letters hoping he would join the cause against Athens, which was inspired partly by his poor treatment here.
There!
Go after him, cousin Buckingham. He's riding quickly to the town hall. There, at the most advantageous moment, bring up the possibility that King Edward's children are illegitimate. Tell the public how Edward executed a citizen just for saying that he would make his son "heir to the crown"when he was only talking about the tavern he owned, "The Crown." And then bring up Edward's hateful lust and his insatiable appetite for women, which stretched even to the citizens' servants, daughters, and wivesanyone that his lustful eye and savage heart wanted to prey on. If you need to, you can even bring me up: tell them that when my mother became pregnant with that insatiable Edward, my noble father York was away fighting wars in France. If you calculate the time of Edward's birth, and consider the fact that he looks nothing like my father, then it's clear that he's not my father's true son. But only vaguely touch on that subject. For, as you know, my lord, my mother is still alive.
A conspiracy, a total conspiracy, that deceived us all!
Oh, please, I beg you, I asked you never speak of him again. But if you would tell me that another man loves me instead, I would rather hear that than angels singing.
What do you think about Stanley then? Won't he join us?
News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come. Man, what do you hear? Do you have any letters for me? Will we have justice? What does Jupiter say?
I know she is an annoying, argumentative scolder. If that's all, masters, then I see no problem.
Truly, gentlemen, I'm now playing the part of the merchant, and I've made a desperate bargain.
I put your little gift in my pocket, for Malvolio can't keep his nose out of anything. My lady has lovely white hands, and ancient warriors aren't low class taverns, you know.
Now, now! I've barely blinked since I saw it all. The men have hardly sunk to the ocean floor yet and the bear hasn't finished eating the gentleman; he's at it now.
Good. I want you to live, because for me death is sweet now.
Oh, cut my dress open so that my constrained heart can have some room to beat, or else I'll faint from this deadly news!
Pretend you're taking a trip for pleasure.
Please, what kind of man is he?
Come, come, I know what you're referring to, brother-in-law Richard. You're jealous of my friends' rise in rank, and of my own. May God grant that I never need your help.
Let's go.
Go, get out of here, you false, deceitful slave.
Why are you repeating yourself, woman? I said your husband.
I'm going now. If you're as good at pleading on their behalf as I am at saying "no" to you, then there's no doubt this will end well.
Why, man, he's a real devil. I've never seen such a virago. I fought a round with him, with real swords and all, and his thrusts and lunges are so deadly that defeat is inevitable. And when he strikes at you, he'll hit you as surely as your feet hit the ground they're standing on. They say that he used to fence for the Shah of Persia.
Then she's too old, by heaven. A woman should be with a man older than she is, so she can adapt herself to her husband and keep his love constant. We men praise ourselves, boy, but in reality we are more fickle and inconstant in love than women areour desires waver and disappear sooner and more frequently.
That's all true. But for some other reasons, sir, which you don't know, I can't tell my father about this.
My brother's love; the devil; and my rage.
I told Lucullus that you were here. He'll be in soon.
You're making fun of me. Believe me; it's best if I stop.
Come close to me, and hear what we've decided to do after consulting with our advisers. So that our kingdom's ground should not be soiled with the blood of its own people, because our eyes hate the sight of civil war between our subjects, and because we think it was your pride and ambition that made you disturb our country's peace, which had been "sleeping" undisturbed like a baby until you woke it with your trumpets and drums of war, frightening peace away and leaving us to wade through the blood of our own family members. We banish you from our territories. You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of death, shall not come to our fair England again for ten years, and instead will walk the unfamiliar paths of banishment.
Consistent in what, being horrible? I have breathed from my soul the most faithful, devoted offerings possible, but they've only fallen upon your ungrateful and unwelcoming altar, you rude lady. What else can I do?
Why, sir, I trust that I'm allowed to speak, and speak I will. I am not a child or an infant. Better men than you have heard me speak my mind, and if you cannot endure it, then you'd better stop up your ears. My tongue must express the anger of my heart, or else my heart will burst from trying to contain it all. So I will speak as freely as I like, no matter what.
Oh, calm yourself, gentle lordalthough I know theres enough written here on the ground to enrage even the mildest person, and make children exclaim with anger. My lord, kneel down with me; Lavinia, kneel; and kneel, sweet boy, who we hope will grow up to be the Roman Hector. Swear with meas Lucreces father, Lord Junius Brutus, swore after her rapethat we will take mortal revenge on these traitorous Goths. Well see them bleed, or well die instead.
I'm sorry for that. Any faults that come to my attention, I'm sure I'll repent for. [LEONTES starts to cry] Well, well. Just call me a classic, over-emotional woman; I've hurt the king's feelings.[To LEONTES] Don't cry over what's in the past and can't be helped. And don't be upset only because I told you toI'd rather you punished me for reminding you of what you forgot. Now sir, forgive me for speaking so harshly. I loved your queen so muchoops, I did it again! I won't talk about her anymore, or about your children, or about my husband, Antigonus, who is lost, too. Beg your pardon; I won't say a word.
I saw the wound. I saw it with my own eyes. God bless that woundhere on his manly chest. A pitiful corpse, a bloody, pitiful corpse. Pale, pale as ashes and covered in blood. Gory with blood. I fainted at the sight of it.
What outfit will your Honor wear today?
Your brother Marcus, too, gives you tears and a kiss. If I could give you an infinite number of both, I would!
I'll drop some mysterious love letters in his path. They'll describe the color of his beard, the shape of his legs, the way he walks, and the expression of his eyes, forehead, and complexionso he'll be sure that they're addressed to him. I can make my handwriting look just like your niece Lady Olivia's. Sometimes we can't tell our writing apart.
A puppet show with living actors. Now that I've seen that, Ill believe that unicorns exist, and that theres a tree in Arabia where the phoenix lives, with a phoenix sitting in it right now.
That's true. He's the crook that put me in this outfit.
But should I live in hope?
I gave her such a handkerchief. It was my first gift to her.
I'm telling you, it's not lost.
Very odd.
No way!
Neither of them is as bad as you; their jobs are better than yours. The worst demon in hell wouldn't trade places with you. You're the damned doorman who lets in every vagabond that comes looking for his slut; every diseased person owes his misery to you. The very food you eat has been burped on by infected lungs.
It sounds like he is more of a shrew than she is.
Then you'd be no cock of mine. You won't fight.
Are you an actor?
Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?
I have heard he has a huge treasure.
Oh, but you'll live in pleasure.
Come, Kate, and wash, and make yourself at home.You bastard villain! Are you really going to spill it?
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] Dear Mother, let yourself be comforted. God is displeased that you respond to his doings so unthankfully. In everyday business, it's considered ungrateful if someone is unwilling to repay a debt which was generously loaned in the first place. It's much worse to be so opposed to heaven, now that it requires the royal debt it lent to you.
So many miseries have cracked my voice that my tongue is weary of wailing and has gone silent. Edward Plantagenet, why are you dead?
I swear by my life that I'll do this for you, my lord. And may God give you a quiet, restful night!
No, because then wed be waste removers.
Greetings, gentleman. How are you?
My virtue will pay for his vice, then, so that he can spend my honor with his shame, like a spendthrift son who steals his fathers money. You dishonour me by letting him live: the traitor survives, the true man dies.
Your heart is good, and I promise, I will tell her that. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Oh misery! Oh miserable, miserable, miserable day! The saddest day, most miserable day that I ever, ever saw! Oh day! Oh day! Oh day! Oh hateful day! There has never been a day as black as this one. Oh miserable day, Oh miserable day!
[As LUCENTIO] What did the girl say when the priest got back up?
Listen, listen! I can hear the musicians playing.
It sounds like you really love her.
We'll meet you in the little room. Now go.
What's the matter?
Not even to pray?
The boy warns that someone is approaching. What cursed person would be wandering out here tonight, interfering with my rituals of true love?
You have, my lord. If it would please your Grace, you should listen to our request and make up for your offense.
Yes, let her rot and perish and go to hell tonight, for she will not live past tonight. No, my heart has turned to stone. If I beat my chest, it hurts my hand. Oh, there's not a sweeter creature in the world! She could be the wife of an emperor and he'd obey her commands.
Bring me the handkerchief. I am worried.
Yes, I did notice that. But it was just courtesy.
I'll tell him that right away.
Love, which spurred me to come and find you. Love advised me, while I lent love my eyes. Im not a sailor. Still, even if you were on the shore across the farthest sea, I would set out to find you.
Take Mamillius with you. He's wearing me out; I can't deal with him anymore.
Your heart was with them even before you signed this. I took it from the traitor, king; fear, and not love, motivates his confession now. Dont forgive him, lest you regret your pity later when he stabs you in the back.
What nice eyes she has! They could provoke a war.
So did I.
Well then, I think Cassio is an honest man.
Is there no God above that pities my grief? Oh, sweet mother, dont throw me out! Delay this marriage for a month, or just a week. Or else make my wedding bed in the family crypt where Tybalt lies.
But look! A sail.
Give me some proof that Desdemona is disloyal.
She's hanging on his neck. If she's so lifelike, she should speak, too.
So infinitely owing
He has some plan in dressing up like this. If it's possible, I'll try to persuade him to put on something better before he goes to the church.
Ha! She cries like a pig prepared to be roasted.
You cannot know, not even if you were squeezing my heart in your hand to make me tell you. And as long as I have my heart, I won't tell you.
Yes, you spoke well of me.
But are they all safe, Ariel?
Well said.
I didnt hear anything.
To give your kingdom to Henry Bolingbroke, as you promised, because you're tired and can't properly execute your duties.
Here.
There is no trust, faith, or honesty in men. They all break their oaths. Theyre all wicked. They all lie. Wheres my servant?Get me some brandyThese griefs, these miseries, these sorrows make me old. Shame on Romeo!
[As LITIO] Boy, I won't stand for these insults!
She treated the youth so well while you were watching to exasperate and anger you, to wake up your meekly sleeping boldness, to fire up your passions. You should have approached her that minute, whipped out some excellent jokes you invented right there on the spot, and humiliated the youth into silence. That was the opening she gave you, but you missed it. This was a golden opportunity for you, but you let it slip away, and now you've sailed out of the warmth of my lady's good opinion. You'll stay there like an icicle in a sailor's beard unless you can redeem yourself to her through some noble act of bravery or politics.
Why then, by God.
Yes, but he'll only make all those ducats last for one year. He's foolish, wasteful, and reckless.
Please, gentle friend, may your wisdom, not your passion, guide you through these uncivilized actions against you. Come with me to my house, and let me tell you about the many pointless practical jokes my beastly uncle has clumsily attempted, so you might come to laugh at this one. You mustn't leave. Don't deny me. Damn that Toby's soul! He startled my heartmy heart which lives in you.
Come here, my friends.
Right here.
Why, it has bay windows as transparent as walls, and the upper windows facing toward the south-north are as clear as ebony. And you're complaining about darkness and a bad view?
He and I will be reconciled again.
[To herself] Hurry on to hell then, and leave this world, you evil spirit! Hell is where your true kingdom is.
Why, exactly! That tailor intends to make a plaything out of you.
Filthiest heathen!
What was his reason? He wasn't on our side when we last spoke together.
Oh, my poor brother! But maybe he has been saved by chance too.
I feared this would happen because he was a brave man, but I didn't think he had a weapon.
We will go in person to this war: and since were a little short on funds (having spent generously on entertainment for the court and gifts for our friends), we have no choice but to raise taxes to fund our war. If that still isnt enough, we'll order our proxies back home to demand large sums of gold from rich men across the kingdom, and send the money to us abroad: for we will be leaving to travel to Ireland very soon.
King, your thoughts should be as imperial as your name. Is the sun dimmed when gnats fly in it? The eagle doesn't mind when little birds sing, since he knows he can shut them up whenever he wantsso can you with the silly citizens of Rome. Then cheer up, emperor. For I will enchant the old Andronicus with words sweeter and more dangerous than baits to fish or stalks of honeysuckle to sheep, when they're wounded with the bait or poisoned with delicious food.
Me toothat would be like an executioner serving a thief.
Are Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
Tell me, can you deliver a speech to the emperor with a grace?
Aha, so there! He's laughing like he's won her over!
I'm thinking. But I'm finding it hard to come up with something. Nonetheless, I've found some inspiration. Here: if she is beautiful and wise, she'll use her wisdom to make use of her beauty.
Villain, I have done your mother.
Good morning, lords; oh, tell me, have you seen Aaron the Moor?
A portrait. When will your book be published?
I know it doesn't make either of us very happy.
Either restrain yourself, leave the chapel, or get ready for more amazement. If you can handle it, I'll make the statue move, walk down, and take you by the hand. But I'm afraid you'll think I'm a witch using black magic.
Oh, Othello, you used to be so good, and now you've fallen under the control of a cursed villain. What can I say to you?
Quiet, quiethave some shame at least, if you can't be kind.
Are you mocking me?
Here comes the duke himself, right on time.
Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds! Have mercy, Jesus! But wait, I was only dreaming. Oh, you coward conscience, how you torture me! The candles burn blue. It is now dead midnight. I'm in a cold sweat and trembling with fear. What am I so afraid of? Myself? There's no one else here. Richard loves Richard; that is, I am only myself. Is there a murderer here? No. But yes, it's me. Then run away! What, from myself? Yes, so I won't take revenge. What, revenge myself upon myself? Alas, I love myself. But why? Have I ever done myself any good? No, no! Alas, I hate myself instead, for all the hateful deeds I've committed. I am a villain. But I'm lyingI am not a villain. Fool, speak well of yourself. Fool, do not flatter yourself. My conscience has a thousand separate voices, and each voice tells a separate story, and each story condemns me as a villain. Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree; murder, ominous murder, in the highest degree; all kinds of sins, all done in each degreebad, worse, and worstall of these crimes cry out "Guilty! guilty!" I will despair. There is no one who loves me, and if I die no one will pity me. And why should they, since I can't even find any pity for myself in myself? Just now it seemed like the souls of all those I murdered came to my tent, and every one of them threatened that vengeance would fall on my head tomorrow.
Do you need money? I can give you a little money. [He reaches toward his back pocket]
Everyone make way, and show respect to his majesty.
Give my best to my fellow Athenians
Oh, she says nothing, sir. Instead she weeps and weeps. She falls on her bed, then starts to get up, then calls out Tybalts name and then your name, and then she falls back down on the bed.
What, is the man a lunatic?
Oh, Henry's wife, do not triumph in my woes! As God is my witness, I have wept for yours.
A thousand pieces.
I've seen two unbelievable things, one in the sea and one on land! But now I don't know what's the sea and what's the sky; everything's all mixed up in this storm.
Is it really true?
[Offstage] What time is it?
And yet I have not touched on how loose you've been with your money! How many delicacies have poor men eaten tonight on your account? Who does not seem to belong to Timon? Is there anything in the world that you have not claimed as your own to give? They have called you great, noble, worthy, and royal, but when all you have to buy compliments is gone, there will be no praise left. What is quickly made is quickly lost, and these men will disappear like flies after seeing one winter cloud.
By Janus, I think not.
I told him what I thought, and said no more than that which he himself found out to be true.
That's like something out of a fairytale, too, which you won't believe no matter how many times I tell it. He was torn to pieces by a bear, according to the shepherd's son. We should believe him because he's fairly stupid, but also because he had some handkerchiefs and rings of Antigonus' that Paulina recognized.
Oh, Publius, isnt this distressing, to see your noble uncle so mad?
Say that I, her king, am her lowly subject.
Sir, isnt my jacket as clean as the first time I wore it? I mean, in a way.
Well, wouldn't you?
Not now, sweet Desdemona. Some other time.
To take is not to give. I'll accept it, but I won't promise anything in return.
If I got what I deserved, you would all be showing me respectI would be your queen, and you would be my subjects. Oh, give me what I deserve, thenand teach yourselves some respect!
It's less than even that: at least imagination has some grief at the root of it, whereas mine has no clear cause. Nothing has caused me grief about something, or something has caused me to grieve about nothing. Something is coming towards me, something that isn't yet known; what it is I cannot name; it's a nameless sadness, I know.
If you had come just two hours earlier
Give me my fan, Peter.
Come on, then, follow me.
How did he get this way?
If you leave like this, miss, I swear I won't ever draw my sword again. Why are you leaving, fair ladydo you think you have fools on your hands here?
Send Sir Toby away, please. He talks like a madman. Shame on him!
And what's that?
Please, sir, tell the queen to come back.
Please, be quiet.
She's dead to me. She has been abused, stolen from me, and corrupted by spells and potions bought from charlatans. For Desdemona is neither lacking in common sense, nor blind to it.  She could not make such a mistake naturally, without some kind of witchcraft.
Curse you! Shut up, you wimpy, offensive, ungenerous dog!
He looks skinny as a dried herring without its eggs. O flesh, flesh, youve turned pale as a fish. Now hes just like Petrarchs hopeless love poetry. In Romeos opinion, compared to his own lady love: Petrarchs Laura was like a kitchen slavethough Laura clearly had a lover who was better at making rhymes; Dido was drab and dull; Cleopatra was a gypsy girl; Helen and Hero were good-for-nothing harlots; Thisbe might have had beautiful eyes, but that doesnt matter.
You promised to get them for me before the feast, but they're just as good now.
What we do, we do because we were commanded to.
Aren't you married?
Stay, man. I can read. [He reads the letter] Signor Martino and his wife and daughters; Count Anselme and his gorgeous sisters; Vitravios widow; Signor Placentio and his lovely nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; my uncle Capulet and his wife and daughters; my fair niece Rosaline and Livia; Signor Valentio and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio and the lively Helena. Thats quite a lovely group of people. Where are they supposed to go?
Brave Othello, we must send you immediately to go fight against the Ottoman forces, enemy to us all. [To BRABANTIO] I didn't see you. Welcome, noble sir. We missed your advice and help tonight.
If the completion of your task will make you happy, be happy then. For it is done.
My name is Mary, sir.
Yes, if only money were as sure a thing as you all asking for it, then you would definitely have it. Why didn't your masters send you to pay the bills for the food they ate off Timon's plate? That way, they could smile and enjoy the debts he incurred and then shovel all the interest he owed into their greedy mouths. You're not doing yourself any favors riling me up like this. Let me go. My lord and I have parted ways. I have no more counsel to give, and he has no more money to spend.
Here is the head of that wicked traitor, the dangerous and unsuspected Hastings
Theyre calling for dates and quinces in the kitchen.
Madam, we'll dance.
Please, go spout your nonsense somewhere else. You don't know me.
Oh, don't spare me, my brother Edward's son, because I'm the son of his father Edward; you've already drained the family blood and drunkenly rolled around in it: I mean my brother Gloucester, a plain and well-meaning soul now in heaven, sacrificed like the pelican. That proves that you had no problem spilling your grandfather's blood before. Your unkindness to our family makes my sickness worse, cutting down the already-withered flower of my life. Live in your shame, but shame won't die with you: you will be remembered this way! Let these words torment you from now on! Take me to my bed, then to my grave: people only love to live when they have love and honor, and I have neither.
Anyone who would have said "yes" to this, even if he didn't do it himself, is a bad person.
Without a doubt, my good friends, the gods themselves have made it so that I will need much help from you: how could you be my friends otherwise? Indeed, why else would youout of thousands of menhave that charitable title of friend, if you did not belong in my heart? I have told you more about myself than you could tell yourself, and through that I have confirmed you to indeed be my friends. I ask the gods sometimes, why would friends be so necessary if we never had any need for them? They would be the most useless creatures alive if we never had any use for them, and would be like beautiful instruments hung up in cases, but keeping their sounds to themselves. Sometimes I wish that I were a poorer man, so that I could be closer to you all in rank. We are born to give and to do goodso what belongs to us more than the riches of our friends? Oh how comforting it is, to have so many friends, like brothers, enjoying one another's fortunes! What a joy, even if it expresses itself in tears before it can be expressed in words! I cannot help but cry, I think. And to forget the faults of my eyes, I drink to you.
Do you know who I am, Apemantus?
Let the sails go slack there! Do it, why don't you! Hurry up!
He threatens the walls of Athens with his own sword.
He swallowed it hook, line, and sinker.
Exactly.
Why do you keep these things hidden? Why do you keep your gifts behind a curtain? Are you afraid they'll get dusty, like some woman's portrait? Why don't you show off your skill by going to church dancing a galliard and coming home dancing a coranto? If I were you, even my walk would be a dance. I wouldn't even pee unless I was dancing at the same time. What do you mean by this? Is this a world where we should hide our virtues? I could always tell from your excellent legs that you were born under a dancing star.
She is young and impressionable. You and I know well from our past passions what lighthearted thoughtlessness there is in youth.
You are a lord, and nothing less than a lord. You have a wife who is far more beautiful than any other woman in this declining age.
It's a better reason, at least, than your completely haphazard journey overseas with no plan, no trajectory, and no help, with no company but each other. Take care of each other. A heart full of love can make even the worst places bearable, and can bring a smile to your face even in the midst of suffering.
I pledged my love before you even requested it. But now I wish I could take that promise back to give it again.
I wish you'd deal me another coin, sir, but then it would be double-dealing, and therefore dishonorable.
The wedding was wonderful, and were doing just great on our journey back home.
If you need us, we'll be in the garden. Should we wait for you there?
But why wasn't the prophet able to foresee that I, who was there at the time, would kill him?
Did he listen to your music?
No, please, stay a minute. I'm hoping that my compassionate mood will pass. It usually only lasts about twenty seconds.
Well, I have to disagree. But let's have some proof. Each one of us should send for his wife, and whoever's wife is most obedient, and comes immediately when he sends for her, that man will win the bet we make.
[To himself] Well done, Tranio.
Monday, my lord.
No, no, I swear, I can't. He'd kill me.
My leadership would be so perfect that my colony would be even better than the mythical ancient Golden Age.
No, you sweet, caring man, you.
But is all this true? Or are you just having fun, like silly travelers, and playing jokes on people you meet along the way?
He wouldnt get drunk because there isn't any wine.
Oh, it's really a foul thing for her to do.
What's this noise?
Oh, quit it. Well, well, of all the evil things that go on on earth, the gods will be the least happy about this.
I suspect that I've committed some offense that the citizens disapprove of, and you've come to reprimand me for my ignorance.
Don't teach your lips to curl so scornfullythey were made for kissing, lady, not for such contempt. If your vengeful heart cannot forgive me, then here, take my sharp-pointed sword and bury it in my chest. That way my soul, which adores you, can be free. I lay myself open to being killed, and in fact, I humbly beg for death on my knees.
I hope so, sir, and I am at your service too.
No, sir, not a bit. I know your face well, even without a sailor's cap on your head. Take him away. He knows that I've recognized him.
I know you are my friend. I can't believe I got drunk!
What do you think? Do you think it's true that he's got a hidden stash of gold?
Then you're the bigger fool for betting money on my obedience.
What a dishonorable, puny boy, and more cowardly than a rabbit. He shows his dishonesty in abandoning his friend in his time of need, and denying that he even knew him. And as for his cowardice, ask Fabian.
Good Catesby, go do your work well.
[To SIR TOBY BELCH] Look, he resents it when you insult the devil! Pray to God that he's not bewitched!
[As LUCENTIO] Will sweet Bianca practice being a bride?
I can't help myself: I feel sorry for her.
What would you do then, Apemantus?
[Reading] "And don't be amazed or ask why I call you that, for I won't give you any reason for it."
[Offstage] Hey! Hey!
They are, sir, and are waiting to present themselves to you.
[Speaking in French] May God protect you, sir.
The third is from Antioch. His shield shows a green wreath, with the motto, "I'll fight my way to the top."
If I answered that, Id be confessing to you.
Where?
I will go now, Catesby.[To the others] Lords, will you go with me?
Are you not a whore?
There is no other way, unless you could change your shape and be someone other than the Richard who has committed all these deeds.
When Hermione was alive, no one was as beautiful as she was. It's the same with her statue; I'm sure you've never seen another man-made thing that's as perfect. That's why I keep it hidden here. Here it is; get ready to see that which is to life as sleep is to deaththe closest you can come without being the actual thing. Take a look, and tell me what you think.[PAULINA pulls back a curtain, revealing HERMIONE standing like a statue]I like your silence; it shows how in awe you are. But say something! [To LEONTES] You first, sir. Does it look anything like her?
Why, would that have improved my hair?
This is a really funny one that's set to the tune of "Two girls flirting with the same guy." Girls all over the country are singing it; it's in vogue, I'm happy to say.
A piece of ice. If you doubt me, try it outyou could slide from my shoulder to my heel after just a step from my head to my neck. Start a fire, good Curtis.
Is that so? If it please your Worship, Brakenbury, you can listen to anything we say. We're not plotting any treason, man. We say that the king is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen is well advanced in years, beautiful, and not jealous. We say that Mister Shore's wife has pretty feet, cherry lips, lovely eyes, and a pleasant voice. We say that the queen's relatives have all become nobles. What do you say to that, sir? Can you deny any of this?
No, believe me.
What?
No, I swear on my life and soul! Send for him and ask him.
I loved the man so dearly that I must weep. I took him to be the most honest, harmless Christian that ever walked the earth. I made him like my diary, and trusted him with all my soul's most secret thoughts. He covered his wickedness with a virtuous facade so well that, if his guilt hadn't become apparentI mean his affair with Shore's wifeI never would have suspected him.
But jealous souls need no evidence. They aren't jealous because of a reason, but merely because they are jealous people. Jealousy is a monster that gives birth to itself.
He has changed a lot.
Lord, he says? That monster is such an idiot!
You notorious whore! Cassio, do you have any idea who attacked you?
First, sir, please: who are you?
No, I swear to God! I wish you would bear your misfortune like a man!
Athens, my lord.
Follow him and try to calm him down some.
[Singing] Should I tell him to go, and not spare his feelings?
[Reading the letter] "Don't fail to do this, since you will"
Are you hurt, lieutenant?
What tongueless blockheads! Why wouldn't they speak? Will the mayor and his fellow citizens not come here?
[To the cloak on the ground] Lay there, my magic.[To MIRANDA] Wipe your eyes. Take comfort. As for the awful shipwreckwhich touched the goodness of your heart and moved you to such compassionI controlled it so carefully with my magic that not one person was hurt. No, not a hair was lost from the head of any person on that ship which you heard break apart and saw sink. Sit down. There's more that you must know.
No, he is dead, and Edward killed him.
[Offstage] Ding-dong.
Her royal birth is what makes her safest.
Is that a west wind blowing?
Sir, restrain yourself. The red paint on her lips is wet. You'll smudge it if you kiss it, and you'll get oil paint on your own face. Should I close the curtain?
Since you promised to be my boyfriend,You shouldn't have any secrets from me.
I swear on my life, with all my heart!
To knock the brains out of an honest Athenian.
Call them back, sweet prince. Accept their request. If you deny them, the whole country will regret it.
Yes, I will.
It is too late. [OTHELLO smothers DESDEMONA]
Now he's talking about how she dragged him to my bedroom. Oh, Cassio, I'm going to cut off your nose and throw it to some dog.
You're serious?
Give me your hand. Im sorry I beat you up. But for as long as you live, be more polite when you speak.
Not me.
Bless my soul. When was this, boy?
Except for the widow Dido, if I may say so.
Ah, you jokesterthats the dogs name. R is for theno, I know that word begins with another letter. She says such pretty things about you and rosemary that it would do you good to hear them.
I guess I'll play the part I've been given.
The heaviest loss is mine as well.
Gentleman, calm down. I've made my decision, and I can't be swayed.Go inside, Bianca.
I'll show how skilled I am in battle.
Go to bed right away. I will come back soon. Dismiss your servant there in the bedroom. Make sure you do this.
Would that be better, madam, than me being what I am? I wish that it would, for right now I'm a fool.
You don't?
I learned it from women's faces. I have a question: what color are your eyebrows?
What's your reason for leaving, my bitter friend?
Oh did he? I order you, come with me.
[Reading] "With a large, wide sleeve"
But in all of your silly little jokes, you see me as nothing. So go on, laugh at nothing.
Why, uncle, what's the matter?
I've only tried to do the right thing; I haven't thought or done a single wrong thing. I came here to compete in the tournament for honor's sake, not to commit treason. Anyone who says otherwise will have to fight me for honor.
Good evening, my spiritual confessor.
[To himself] Oh, this moron, what an ass it is!
I know so. But, dear Lady Anne, let's leave this battle of wits and move into a calmer, slower conversation. Isn't the person who caused the untimely deaths of these PlantagenetsHenry and Edwardas much to blame as the person who physically committed the murders?
Please, do.
Yes, that's exactly what I would do.
I promise, I will. Let me look at this face. Its Mercutios relative, noble Count Paris. What did my servant tell me while we were riding here? I was so upset I wasnt paying attention to him. I think he told me Paris was supposed to marry Juliet. Isnt that what he said? Or was I dreaming? Or am I crazy and, hearing him say something about Juliet, I jumped to the wrong conclusion? [Speaking to Paris body] Oh, give me your hand. You and I both had equal measures of bad fortune! Ill bury you in a magnificent grave. [ROMEO opens the tomb to reveal JULIET inside] A grave? No! It is a cupola atop a tower, my dead young man. Juliet lies here, and her beauty fills this tomb like a festival chamber full of light. Dead man, lie down right thereanother dead man is burying you. [ROMEO lays PARIS in the tomb] Men are often happy just before their death. Their nurses call it the lightness before death. Oh, how can I call this lightness? Oh, my love, my wife! Though death has sucked the honey from your breath, it has not yet had the power to ruin your beauty. You are not conquered. A beautiful banner of red still lingers on your lips and cheeks. The paleness of death has not yet reached them. Tybalt, are you lying there in your bloody shroud? Oh, what better favor can I do for you than to use the hand that cut short your youth to kill your murderer. Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet, why are you still so beautiful? Should I believe that death itself loves you, and that the hungry, hated monster keeps you here in the dark to be his lover? To make sure that doesnt happen, Ill stay with you forever and never again leave this dark tomb. Here, here Ill remain with the worms that are your chamber-maids. Oh, Ill rest here forever and escape the control of the bad fortune that has plagued my body. Eyes, see for the last time! Arms, make your last embrace! And lips, you doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss the infinite deal I have made with death. [ROMEO kisses JULIET and takes out the poison] Come, bitter transport. Come, unpleasant guide! You desperate pilot, crash this seasick and weary ship into the rocks. Heres to my love! [He drinks the poison] Oh, honest pharmacist, your drugs work quickly. With this kiss, I die.
[To TRANIO] Sir, let me make sure you understand this: the youngest daughter, the one you long for, is kept locked away from all suitors by her father. He won't promise her to any man until the elder sister is married first. Then, and only then, will the younger be free.
Sir, sir, the first one's mine, so let her go by.
I and many of our friends have tried to speak with him. But he insists on sharing his thoughts only with himself, though I dont know how good the advice is that hes giving himself. He keeps his secrets so completely that hes like a flower bud that cant open to the air or sun, because its been poisoned from within by the bite of a worm. If we could just find out the cause of his sadness, wed try to help him as eagerly as we have tried to figure out why he feels sad.
I could marry that Maria for coming up with this scheme.
I'm glad. He's a good governor.
I can sing my part; it's my job, of course. Let's sing.
Remember, as you read, what you promised me! Im sorry for what I did; dont see my name signed there, since my hand didnt follow my heart.
Under the weather?
I swam ashore, man, like a duck. I can swim like a duck, I swear it.
My prayers, you hussy?
I can give you a reason.
My noble father, I feel that my loyalty is divided. I owe you for my very life and my upbringing. And because of this I respect you.  I have a duty to you, as I am your daughter. But here is my husband. And as my mother showed duty to you, prioritizing you above her own father, so must I show duty to my husband, the Moor.
Sir, my daughter likes you. She likes you so much that she wants you to be her master, and she'll be your student. What do you think?
Well, may she and Othello be happy in bed! Come now, lieutenantI have a jug of wine and there are a couple of gentlemen from Cyprus here who'd gladly want to drink a toast to the health of black Othello.
Mercutio, you hang out with Romeo.
This is as strange an experience as men have ever had. And its clear that there's more to what happened than natural causes can explain. We need some priest or prophet to explain what happened.
Have you forgotten the Duke of Hereford, boy?
Wait, let me say a word or two before you go. I have served the government of Venice well, and they know it. But nothing more about that. I beg you, in your letters, when you relate the story of these unfortunate deeds, speak of me as I am. Don't downplay my crime, but don't exaggerate it maliciously. Speak of me as a man who loved not wisely, but too much; a man who was not easily made jealous, but was manipulated and tricked into extreme jealously; a man who behaved like a vile Indian that throws away a pearl worth more than his whole tribe. Speak of me as a man who is not used to crying, but whose eyes now drop tears like the Arabian trees that drip with medicinal sap. Write this, and also say that one time in Aleppo a malicious Turk wearing a turban beat a Venetian, flouting the Venetian state, and so I grabbed the circumcised Turkish dog by his throat and struck him down like this.
I'm here, my lord, at your service.
Rather than just giving you empty thanks for your vow, I will take up your generous offer and give you an order right now. Within three days, let me hear you say that Cassio is dead.
Marcus, we will.
Tell him that when our princely father, the Duke of York, blessed his three sons and commanded us to love each other, he never imagined that our friendship would end up divided like this. Remind Richard of this, and he will weep.
If it pleases the gods to protect you through men, then men will comfort you, feed you, sleep with you. Boult's back.
Do I have to? Do I have to read out everything Ive done wrong? Kind Northumberland, if your offences were on the record, wouldnt you feel ashamed to read them all out? If you did, youd find one crime therethe deposing of a king, marked with a blot, damned in the eyes of heaven. And all of you that stand here and watch me suffer are guilty too: though some of you wash your hands with Pilate and look sorry for me, you have delivered me to my cross, and water wont wash away your sin.
Will you come in the house? My niece wants you to, if your business is with her.
Madam, you have mistreated me. Scandalously mistreated me.
He's the most cowardly criminal in the entire country. If you just shouted and looked intimidating, you'd scare him away.
[To TRANIO] Sir, a word before you go. Are you a suitor to the girl you asked aboutyes or no?
I think fathers are usually important guests at their sons' weddings. Another question: has your father gone senile? Is he ancient and in poor health? Can he speak? Hear? Recognize people? Take care of his property? Is he bedridden? Is he basically like a child again?
Haha. Well done!
Send some speedy ally to the duke of Norfolk. You go yourself, Ratcliffeor Catesby. Where is Catesby?
[To himself] The deep-thinking, clever Buckingham will no longer be privy to my plots. Has he run with me for so long, only to stop for a "moment to breathe" now? Well, so be it.
I don't like this task. But since I'm already so deeply involved in this, thanks to foolish honesty and concern for you, I will go on. I was recently spending the night in Cassio's bedroom and couldn't sleep because of a raging toothache. Now, some men have such a loose soul that they mutter things in their sleep. Cassio is one of them. I heard him say in his sleep, "Sweet Desdemona, let's be careful and hide our love." And then, sir, he clutched and grabbed my hand, crying "Oh sweet woman!" and he kissed me hard as if with his kisses he was trying to pull up some plant by the roots that was growing on my lips. He laid his leg over my thigh and sighed, and kissed, and then cried out, "Curse fate for giving you to the Moor!"
Listen, your mother is coming over. Pretty soon we'll have a new prince to take care of, and then you'll wish we'd play with you more.
Women are meant for bearing, and so are you.
May God preserve your Lordship in that noble state of mind.
That's like blowing on a fire to try to put it out. It's like digging up a hill to stop it growing tall; you'll build a higher mountain in the process. My dear, as bad as our suffering is, at least it's only felt. If someone up to no good were to take notice, they might make things even worse.
It's Brabantio. General, be advised that he comes with bad intentions.
And the wavering common people are his enemies too: they love their wallets, and whoever takes money from them fills their hearts with deadly hate.
I think that you're not who you think you are.
[Pointing to different servants] I will split you all up and send you to Lord Lucius, you to Lord Lucullus, my hunting-partner today, and you to Sempronius. Tell them you come from me, and due to extenuating circumstances I could use their help and some money. Ask for fifty talents from each.
Ah, Ive discovered that madmen are deaf.
Why, isn't it news that Petruchio is coming?
You're on the right track. Good night, lieutenant. I must go and keep a lookout.
Yes.
With my own lieutenant!
The ringleader, the Abbot of Westminster, has died with the burden of a guilty conscience; but Carlisle is here, captured, to hear your sentence on him.
Yes, boy.
Me neither. Im full of energy. They all fell asleep together, as if theyd all agreed on it earlier. They fell asleep as if theyd all been struck by lightning. What might happen, noble Sebastian, what might happen if? No, I shouldn't say any more. And yet, I think I can see in your face what you have the potential to be. Opportunity is knocking on your door, and my imagination sees a crown coming to rest on your head.
Dark as hell, Sir Topas.
If they have done this, my noble lord
Who taught you this?
Imagine me after three months being married to her, sitting in my majestic chair
He seems a little upset.
She would never tell me who her parents were. Whenever I asked, she would sit still and weep.
Please, sir, do you know anything about this matter?
No, I'm not troubled. I think Desdemona is nothing but honest.
You were unhappy before I came, madam. But my coming here has made you happy.
Twenty thousand crowns right away, and one half of my lands after my death.
But what is his manner?
Woe is me! Seeing my daughter dead is like a warning bell of my own imminent death.
I dreamed that dreamers often lie.
Are you okay, Cassio? Oh, we need a chair, a chair!
At sea! Who was your mother?
Quiet down.
Please, forgive me. There's nothing I can say in my defense.
The youth is just as afraid of Sir Andrew. He's pale and gasping, as if a bear were chasing him.
Don't worry, my lord. I'll speak as persuasively as if I were trying to win the throne for myself. And so farewell, my lord.
Now, isnt this jesting better than groaning about love? Now youre being sociable. Now youre Romeo. Now you are what you truly are, both naturally and through education. In contrast, this love of yours made you like some fool who runs all over the place looking for a hole in which to hide his precious trinket.
Sir, please listen, or I'll stop here.
Well, Juliet, Ill lie with you tonight. Let me think how. Evil acts are quick to enter the thoughts of desperate men! I remember a pharmacist who lives around here, and who I recently noted wears tattered clothes and has jutting brows. He knows his medicinal herbs. He looks poor, as if misery had worn him to the bone. A tortoise shell hung in his shabby shop, along with a stuffed alligator and the skins of odd-shaped fish. A few empty boxes sat on his shelves, as well as green clay pots, empty water skins, and some musty seeds. Old strands of string and rose petals pressed into cakes were displayed all scattered around. Seeing his poverty, I said to myself, If a man needed some poisonwhich is punishable by immediate death to sell in Mantuahere is a miserable wretch whod sell it to him. Oh, this idea came before I even knew I needed the poison. But this is the poor man who will sell it to me. As I remember, this is the house. Since todays a holiday, the beggars shop is shut. Hey! Pharmacist!
What? You don't like it?
You look tired.
Some booty! Some booty!
It is incredible how its beauty reflects the dignity of its subject! Look at the intelligence that twinkles in the eye! There is a certain imagination that moves in its lip! Even though the painting is silent I feel like I could understand what the man is saying.
Go find him, and in the meantime you all play the tune.
I swear on my hand, it was yours. And look how much he cares about your foolish wife! She gave him her handkerchief, and he turns around and gives it to a whore.
Make sure that you don't mock your king by lying in front of him. Otherwise God, the supreme King of Kings, will uncover your hidden lies and cause you to be the death of each other.
Who knows what the Lord Protector Richard thinks about this? Who is closest to the noble duke?
Foolish and out-of-control; yet even so, I see some sparks of something better which might come out when hes older. But whos here now?
I'm not sure, except that they are busy with some fake marriage contract. Go get your exclusive rights to that girl. Go to the church and take a priest, a clerk, and some honest-enough witnesses. If this isn't what you've been waiting for, then I have nothing more to saybut bid Bianca farewell forever.
The Emperor of Russia was my father. I wish he were alive to see his daughter on trial now! Seeing my misery, he'd take pity, not revenge.
I wish I would have been there to have helped the old man!
Me too.
Now I won't deliver this letter, for the young gentleman's behavior shows that he is noble and sensible, and his role as a messenger between his lord and my niece confirms this. Therefore this letter, which is so incredibly ignorant, won't frighten him at all. He'll know it came from a fool. But, sir, I will deliver Sir Andrew's challenge by word of mouth. I'll describe him as having a great reputation for bravery, and convince the youth that Sir Andrew is angry, courageous, and skilled with a swordand he'll believe me because he's so young. Then they'll both be so afraid, that when they see each other they'll kill each other with just a look, like basilisks.
[Whispering] Oh, gimme a break! When he's alone and musing to himself he acts even more like a proud peacock. See how he struts and shows his feathers!
My good lord, don't give up on me. Be patient, because the prize Im bringing you to will cover up the bad luck we had before. So please speak quietly. Everything's quiet, as if it's the middle of the night.
Prince, here lies Count Paris, killed. And Romeo dead. And Juliet, who was dead before, but is warm like someone newly killed.
What, not a whore?
Quiet, children, quiet. The king loves you both very much. You innocent, naive children, you cannot guess who caused your father's death.
You're right, sir. It's for my mistress.
Villain, you'd better be sure that my wife turns out to be a whore. You'd better be sure of it. Give me proof that I can see with my own eyes, or I swear on my soul that you'll wish you had been born a dog rather than have to answer to my anger.
He hasn't spent it on wars, for he hasn't fought any; instead, he makes compromises when his noble ancestors would have fought on the battlefield: he's spent more in peace than they spent in war.
Aemilius, take care with this message. If he asks for some proof that we won't harm him, ask him what we can do to show we're in good faith.
Within the small rind of this little flower there is both poison and medicine. If you smell it, you feel good. If you taste it, it stops your heart. Two opposing elements, good and evil, reside in both men and herbs. In the cases where evil predominates, death will soon kill the plant or body like a cancer.
I mean the Lord Protector.
Did he say that, Tranio?
Yes, entirely, he's eager to get on the battlefield.
Same with me. I know how it is.
Servilius! It's good to see you. Please, bring me to Timon, my good friend.
[Offstage] I beg you to let me speak with you, my good lord!
Let's split it equally, mates, equally. Come on, get her onboard.
Most noble Timon, would you call the man before you?
[Returning to SIMONIDES] He said thank you, and that his name is Pericles, that he's from Tyre, and was only shipwrecked here by chance.
If you were born to power, sir, prove how honorable you are now. If you rose to power later, prove that those who thought you were honorable then made a good choice.
There's nothing we can do about it. [To FLORIZEL] Are you all dressed?
[To the THIRD LORD] Oh how are you? What is new with the world?
Camillo, sir. I spoke with him and with the shepherds. I've never seen men so afraid: they kneel, kiss the ground, and swear every time they speak. Polixenes can hardly listen to them; he keeps threatening them with death.
[To TRINCULO] How did you escape the shipwreck? How did you end up here? Swear on this bottle of wine how you got here. I swear on the bottlewhich I made myself from the bark of a tree after I washed up on shorethat I survived by grabbing onto a barrel of wine that the sailors threw overboard during the storm.
The noble duke has sworn his coming is just to claim his inheritance; and to obtain that, we have all sworn to help him. Let him never see joy that breaks that oath!
We thank you, sir.
How strange!
[To himself] Pray to the devils; the gods have given up on us.
Hes as ugly in his manners as in his appearance.[To CALIBAN] Go, sir, to my hut. Take your companions with you. If you hope for my forgiveness, clean it well.
You false prophet, stop your frantic curses before we lose our patience and cause you harm.
We are not thieves, just poor men.
Oh, sir, we have no doubt.
Now that I see him in this brighter light, its clear that hes not much of a monster. I used to be scared of him! Hes a pretty unconvincing monster. The man in the moon! Hes a poor, gullible monster. [To CALIBAN] Thats a good swig of wine you just took, monster! I mean it!
Oh, this wind of misery, scattering misfortunes everywhere! Oh, my accursed womb, the bed of death! It has unleashed a basilisk onto the world, a monster whose very look is murderous!
Yes, fool.
Everywhere that God can reach is a safe haven to a wise man. Tell yourself this: there is no virtue like necessity. Think not that the king banished you, but instead that you banished the king. Woe sits heavier where it perceives weakness. Go, say I sent you out to win honor and not that the king exiled you. Or pretend there's some disease going around here and you're leaving for a healthier climate. Whatever your soul holds dear, imagine that it lies where you're going, not where you came from. Pretend the singing birds are musicians, the grass the carpet of a royal chamber, the flowers fair ladies, and your steps no more than a dance: for snarling sorrow has less power to bite the man who makes light of it.
Is my sweet son alive?
Am I the bird you're shooting at now? I'll fly to a different tree, so you must follow me with your bow. You are all welcome here. Ladies, let me lead you out.
[To ALONSO] Sir
Do you think so, sir?
Now, I swear! Hortensio fears his widow.
Oh, you wretch! It is she who could have blocked you from all the murders you've committedby strangling you in her cursed womb.
Yes, with a heart as eager to become a husband as any slave has ever wanted freedom. Here's my hand.
We mean well by going to this party, but its not smart of us to go.
My brother, I wish I could bear some of that grief for you.
Something slipped my mind. Poetry is like sap that oozes from the tree it gets its nutrients from. The spark that illuminates in the flint does not reveal itself until the flint is hit with something, but our gentle flame lights itself up and runs like a current over every surface it touches. What is that right there?
Does he have a good ship?
As to whether she will stay or go, it shall be as you decide privately. But this business is urgent, and we must act quickly.
He's fortunate to have his subjects speak so highly of his government. How far is the court from where we are now?
If it wasn't her, then I can't say who told me.
Psh! Don't say that. Iago, I am not pleased that you've known about this, especially since I've given you access to my wallet as if it were your own.
I promise I will, my lord.
Your story would cure deafness. Its impossible not to hear it.
A knight from Sparta, sir. The design on his shield shows an African man reaching toward the sun, with the motto "Your light is my life."
You don't beg? There's a lot of people in our country, Greece, that get more from begging than we do from working.
Why, then, the champions are prepared, so we're just waiting for his majesty.
We may live, son, to cry many more.
Well, well, as for himhe brought his disease here, and he just keeps it up. I know he'll come here soon and that he'll spend plenty of money.
So the two of us will cry together. Cry for me in France, and Ill cry for you here; better to be as far away from me as possible. Go, count your journey with sighs, Ill count mine with groans.
Now the time has come. At this very instant, you must listen. Pay close attention. Can you remember the time before we came to live in this shack? I don't think you can, because you weren't even three years old.
And then I called you a "poor imitation of a queen" and a "meaningless decoration on my throne"the image of what I was in realitythe pretty prologue to an ominous tragedy; a woman lifted high only to be hurled down below; a mother mocked with the gifts of two dear babies, only to lose them. You were a shadow of a queen; a gaudy banner that enemies could target; an empty symbol of dignity; a breath; a bubble; a mockery of a queen; a stand-in only there to fill the role. And where is your husband now? Where are your brothers? Where are your two sons? Where do you find your joy? Who kneels before you and makes requests and says, "God save the queen?" Where are the bowing noblemen who flattered you? Where are the crowds that followed you? Without all this, see what you are: instead of a happy wife, a grieving widow; instead of a joyful mother, a woman who wails over her children; instead of a queen, a poor wretch crowned only with worries; instead of one granting favors, one humbly begging for favors. She who mocked me is now mocked by me, and she who commanded everyone is now obeyed by no one. See how the wheel of justice has turned, leaving you the victim of time. All you have left are the memories of your former glory, which torture you even more when you consider what you've become. You usurped my position, and now see how you usurp my sorrow. Your proud neck bears half of my heavy burden, but now let me give it all to you. Farewell, York's wife, queen of sad misfortune. These English woes will make me smile in France.
Your lieutenant, Cassio. My good husband, if I have any grace or power to persuade you, please accept his apology. I swear he truly loves you and made a mistake on accident, not on purpose, or else I can't judge an honest face. Please, call him back here.
Put it up there.
She's a great dancer.
If you can think of any crime you haven't atoned for, make amends with God right now.
I'll meet you there early.
I don't have a far-fetched reason for it, but my reason is good enough.
What country is this, friends?
Boult, write a full report of her: the color of her hair, complexion, height, age, with a guarantee of her virginity, and cry, "Whoever pays the most can have her first." If I know men, a virginity like this won't go cheap. Do exactly as I say.
[Giving money to the FOOL] Come on. Here's sixpence for you. Let's have a song.
My goodness! Look, she's coming.
You son of a hag, get going! Bring us firewood. And youd better be quick, because I have other work for you. Are you shrugging as if refusing my orders, you evil thing? If you neglect my commands, or perform them grudgingly, Ill overwhelm your body with painful cramps. I'll fill your bones with aches, and make you scream so that the wild animals will tremble at the noise you make.
Ha! Ha! Desdemona, unfaithful to me?
If he had had as many lives as hairs on his head, I would have had enough revenge for each one of them.
Those two lords both think highly of you.
Its a deal!
If you like, my lord, the honorable Lord Lucullus begs that you accompany him hunting tomorrow, and has sent you two sets of greyhounds.
For each real grief there are twenty imaginary shadows, which look like grief but are not so: for sorrow's eye, blurred with blinding tears, divides one thing into many objects. Like a perspective painting (which looked at directly is a mass of confusing shapes, but looked at from an angle shows a clear form), you, looking from an angle at your lord's departure, find more shapes of grief to distress you. But, looked at it is, it's nothing but unreal shadows. Then, most gracious queen, don't cry at anything more than your lord's departure: there isn't anything else, or if there is, you're seeing it with the eye of sorrow, whose tears create imaginary images.
If I did so, I would be lying: comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth, where nothing lives but problems, cares and grief. Your husband went to save a far-away place, while others make him lose at home: I'm here to prop him up, but weak with age, I can't even support myself. Now comes the sickness after his over-indulgence; now he shall test the loyalty of the friends that flattered him.
Don't cry, sir, we've got enough wailing with the storm going on. Here's all that's left alive of your queen: a little daughter. For her sake, be a man and be strong.
[As VINCENTIO] See, I told you your son was well-loved in Padua.
What, are you trying to make me go crazy? Aren't I Christopher Sly, son of old Sly from Barton-on-the-Heath, a peddler by birth, trained to be a cardmaker, who then became a bear keeper, and now a pot-mender? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat innkeeper in Wincot, if she knows me! If she doesn't tell you about the tab I've run upfourteen pence on beer alonethen you can call me the biggest liar in God's kingdom. What! I'm not crazy! Here's
Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.
Well, you can do that then. I want you to kill two great enemies of mine, enemies of my sleep and my peace of mind. Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
Go away! Who are you?
Ok, sir.
Sir, I invite your Highness and your men to my little hut, where you can sleep tonight. I'll spend part of the night telling you a tale that will make the time pass quicklythe story of my life, and everything that happened since I first arrived on this island. And in the morning Ill bring you to your ship and we'll all go to Naples, where I hope to see the wedding of our two beloved children. From there, with my work completed, I will retire to Milan, where Ill spend my time contemplating my coming death.
Are you gone just like that, my love, my lord? Ah, husband, lover, I must hear from you every day. There are many days in each minute. Oh, by this count Ill be so much older before I see you again, my Romeo.
Hang out? What, are we musicians in a band? If we look like musicians to you, you can expect to hear nothing but noise. [Touching his sword] This is my fiddlestick. It will make you dance. My Godhang out!
Oh, Ratcliffe, I have dreamed a fearful dream! What do you think, will all our friends prove loyal?
If my eyes ever show me such a lie about the woman they worship, then may my tears turn into flames. That way my eyes, which never drowned in all my tears, may be burned for being such clear liars! A woman more beautiful than my love? The sun has never seen anyone as beautiful since the world began.
Does he usually hit her like that? Or did the letter he was reading raise his temper and make him so angry that he hit her?
Please, no morestop. You know that hearing that is like seeing him die all over again. But your words will keep me in check when I see this young man. Here they come.[CLEOMENES, FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and gentlemen come back in]Florizel, your mother should be proud: you look exactly like your father did when he was your age. So much so that I'm tempted to call you "brother," like I used to call him, and to start chatting with you about some wild escapades the two of us got up to! You are very welcome here. And your beautiful princessshe's like a goddess! Oh, I lost two children some time ago that would have been as wonderful to behold as you two are now. I lostdue to my own stupidityyour father's friendship, too. I'd do anything to see him again, no matter how painful it might be.
It looks like a coffin, sir.
As will I. If you, made of air, can feel slightly sorry for them, then I, a human like them who has experienced all the feelings they have, will be even more affected than you. Though Im furious about the wrongs they've done to me, I'll let myself be guided by my reason rather than by my anger. It's nobler to act honorably than to seek vengeance. Since they are sorry for what they did, there's nothing else that I want. Go release them, Ariel. Ill cut off my spells, return them to their normal senses, and theyll be themselves again.
Sir, Cassio has a bad temper, and maybe he'll try to hit you. Provoke him so that he will. Then, if he hits you, I'll use that as an excuse to stir up a riot of the inhabitants of Cyprusa riot that won't die down until Cassio is stripped of his position as lieutenant. This will give you an easier path to getting what you want, with my help, and it will get Cassio out of your way. With him standing in the way, you would have no hope of getting what you want.
Ill duel with you. [He draws his sword]
Music, awake her now! [Music begins to play][To HERMIONE] It's time, come down. Don't be a statue anymore. Come to us and you'll amaze all of us who are watching. Come, I'll close your grave. Move! Come on, now, forget death and come back to life.[To LEONTES and the others] Look, she's moving.[HERMIONE steps down from the pedestal and moves toward LEONTES][To LEONTES] Don't be afraid! Everything she does is as safe as my spell, like I told you. Don't reject her until you see her die again, or you'll be killing her a second time. [HERMIONE reaches out her hand, but LEONTES steps back] No, give her your hand. You won her over when she was young. Now that you're old, is she the one who has to win you?
And if I were the king of the colony, would you like to know what Id do?
Go, with this password. Rise and listen.
So be it. But no one besides you knows how she diedand no one else will know, since Leonine is dead. She made my daughter look bad, and stood between her and a good marriage. No one would look at her when Marina was nearby; they looked at her face, while our daughter's was criticized and treated as though she wasn't worth the time of day. It hurt me to see that and, though you may criticize me, it strikes me as what a loving parent ought to do for your only daughter.
Don't sleep at night, and don't eat during the day. Compare lost happiness with current suffering. Remember your children as being sweeter than they were, and think of the one that killed them as fouler than he is. Magnifying your grief makes the person who caused it even worse. Doing all this will teach you how to curse.
Good mother, don't ask any more questions; my life will have to answer for it.
Christ, keep quiet.
I'm sorry, ma'am. I'd almost forgotten Hermione. When you see this princess, though, you'll want to praise her, too. She's like a goddess who converts everyone who sees her to the religion of worshipping her.
But she, your actual subject, hates such a king.
Then I salute you with this royal title: Long live Richard, England's worthy king!
[To ALONSO] Look, noble King, I am Prospero, the former Duke of Milan, who was wronged. To prove to you that it's a real live person speaking to you, I will hug you. And I wish a warm welcome to you and to those with you. [He hugs ALONSO]
Read the clock there. Give me an almanac. [He looks in the almanac] Has anyone seen the sun yet today?
It doesn't matter: he has hurt me, and that's all there is to it. [To the FOOL] You drunken fool, have you seen Dick the surgeon?
[Whispering so MALVOLIO can't hear] What an arrogant villain!
A horse, a horse! I'd give my kingdom for a horse!
Sounds good. What's the bet?
What business, sir?
Holy Saint Francis, what an incredible change! Have you so quickly abandoned Rosaline, whom you loved so much? If so, then young men love not with their hearts but with their eyes. Jesus and Mary, you cried so many tears for Rosaline! So many salty tear-drops wasted, seasoning a love you never even tasted! The sun has not yet burned away the fog from all your sighs. My old ears are still ringing from your groans. And look, here on your cheek theres a stain from an old tear that has not yet been washed off. If you were ever yourself and this sorrow yours, you and your sorrow were all for Rosaline. And are you now changed? Then say the following: women will never be faithful when men are so unreliable.
Stanley, watch your wife. If she sends any letters to Richmond, you will answer for it.
My lord, I promise you that we'll play our parts so well that he'll believe everything we tell him.
No, I can't bear to swear.
What did you say?
Doesn't that look like a jealous man?
He said the truth. And what did Surrey say to that?
And you, sir.
Yes, I can play many parts.
It's unholy.
But my lord you only speak in a daze. You do not have enough money yet to offer even a small meal.
Oh good Antonio, forgive me for causing you trouble.
We wont have enough food or drink for the party. Its almost night already.
This is Illyria, my lady.
By letting your eyes wander. Take a look at other beautiful girls.
I do not always stick to lovers, women, and rich men. Sometimes I hang out with philosophers!
As long as he has enough money and time, I would count on it from Timon.
That's a good girl, give it to me.
No, Bolingbroke: if I've ever been a traitor, let my name be erased from the book of life, and I banished from heaven as I've been banished from here! But what you are, God and I do know; and all too soon, I fear, the king will regret sparing you. Goodbye, my liege. Now there's no particular way I can go; all roads are open to me, except those leading back to England.
I will, but I don't like where this is going.
I'll have to pluck it out.
I do, and it certainly sounds like the language of dreams, like you're talking in your sleep. What is it that you said? This is a very strange sleep. How can you be standing, speaking, and moving, with your eyes wide open, and yet be fast asleep?
The shame is all mine. I was forced to oppose my own heart and give my hand to that boorish, fickle madman, who wooed in a hurry and means to marry at his leisure. I told you he was a crazy fool, hiding his bitter jokes with his forward behavior. He wants to be known as this cheerful libertine, so he'll woo a thousand women, set the marriage date, invite friends, and make a public announcementbut he has no intention of actually getting married. Now everyone must point at poor Katherine and say, "Look, there is mad Petruchio's wifeif he could be bothered to come and marry her!"
And I will keep mine.
Come on, start the music!
What do you want, thieves?
Listen to me, Iago: I will be patient and cunning. Butdo you hear me?I will take violent action later.
My temple is in Ephesus. Go there and make a sacrifice at my altar. In front of the virgin nuns and people there, reveal the story of how you lost your wife at sea. Weep for your grief, and your daughter's. Bring the stories to life by repeating them. Do what I say, or you'll live a cursed life. If you do it, you'll be happy, I'll make sure of it! Now wake up and tell about your dream.
Lend me a stocking. There. Oh, if only we had a chair, to carry him off easily!
It is pitiful, but Iago knows that Desdemona had shamefully cheated on me with Cassio a thousand times. Cassio confessed it, and she repaid his love with a token, the pledge of love that I first gave her. I saw it in his hand. It was a handkerchief, an antique my father gave to my mother.
I'll not stand here while you do: my liege, goodbye. What will happen after this, no one knows, but bad courses of action never lead to good results.
Of course. What did you think?
That's even worse.
What disaster has occurred so early in the morning that it forces me from my bed?
That which you can't undo.
Everything he said is tarnished by what he's done.
Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morning.
I can't stand to think of this humiliation.
Good day to you, gentle Apemantus!
You have my thanks and prayers, ma'am.
Now he denies his crime a bit, and laughs it off.
I haven't even heard you say a hundred words yet, but I do recognize the sound of your voice. Arent you Romeo, the Montague?
Say I will love her forever.
Where are these bloody thieves who are killing men in the dark? This town is so silent! Hey! Murder! Murder! Who are you? Are you good or evil?
And mine say two hundred. But, although our letters do not agree on the exact number, that's often the case with estimates. And all the reports confirm that there is a Turkish fleet heading toward Cyprus.
We thank you, gentle Percy, for your efforts; we'll reward you well for this.
Well, young man, her mother is the lady of the house. A good, wise, and virtuous lady. I nursed her daughter, who you were talking to just now. I tell you, the man who marries that girl will be rich.
Where are those villains? What, there's no man at the door to help me off my horse and take him to the stable! Where are Nathaniel, Gregory, and Philip?
Come, come, you respected elder of Rome, and take our emperor gently by the hand. I mean our emperor Lucius; for I know that the common people want him to take the throne.
Royally! Why, since it contains no king?
As well as a queen with so many reasons to grieve can be expected to do. Poor thingbecause of the stress, she went into labor early.
[To the female servants] Take Mamillius away. He's not allowed to be around her anymore. Take him away! She can entertain herself with the guy that knocked her up.[To HERMIONE]  I know it was Polixenes that got you pregnant.
Sir Baptista, I'm in a bit of a hurry with this business, and I can't come wooing every day. You knew my father well, and through him, me, the only heir to all his lands and wealth, which I have increased rather than depleted. So tell me, if I can win your daughter's love, what dowry will I get when I marry her?
Men should be what they seem to be. And if they aren't, I wish they wouldn't pretend to be anything that they're not!
Sir, I can't hear anything.
My lord, I'll let you convince me this once.
[To himself] What an artist! You couldn't paint a man worse than yourself.
Part of what you say is true: I think suffering may wipe the smile from your face, but it can never change the state of your mind.
[Pointing to CALIBAN] This is the strangest thing I've ever seen.
You shall.
Oh, just one more thing. [He speaks quietly to ANTONIO]
Get him, the thief!
I swear I haven't. I never did anything to hurt you. I never wanted to win her over and never wanted to offend you.
That's the awakened father and his friends. You'd better go inside.
He has confessed.
Well, as you say, it's a choice between two evils. But come, since this great obstacle makes us allies, let's be friends until we can find a husband for Baptista's elder daughter. Then we'll set the younger daughter free to be courted, and we can resume our competition. Sweet Bianca! Happy is the man who wins you! To the victor go the spoils. What do you say, Sir Gremio?
You can save your threats. Death doesn't scare me; death is what I'm after. Life holds nothing for me now. Your love, the light of my life? I've given up on thatit's gone, although I don't know where or why it went. My second blessing, my firstborn son? I'm barred from seeing him as if I had a contagious disease. My third blessing, my poor daughter, was ripped from my breast, the innocent milk still in her innocent mouth, and hauled out to be murdered. I've been publicized as a whore on every street-corner, was denied the normal hospital care for women who've just given birth, and, finally, was rushed to this placein the open airbefore I'd even gotten my strength back. [To LEONTES] So, my king: tell me what blessings I have to live for, that would make me afraid to die? Therefore, carry on. But hear this, and don't misunderstand me: I don't value my own life at all, but my reputationthat I would clear. If I'm going to be condemned on your suspicions alone, with no proof except whatever your jealous mind has come up with, wellthat is injustice, not law. [To all] Gentlemen, I defer to the oracle. May Apollo be my judge!
If he were dead, what would happen to me?
In his heart? In what chapter and verse of his heart?
When I was born. The waves and wind were incredibly violent, washing a sailor straight out of the crow's nest. Another sailor said, "Ha! Will this ever end?" and they kept running around from the front to the back of the boat, the boatswain whistling, the master calling, and everything in complete chaos.
I'll prove it to be true, sir, with judgment and logic.
Where did you memorize all this witty talk?
Yes, but, my lady, I worry that he may keep this distance for so longbecause it is easier to keep doing it, or because some accident or other makes it necessarythat he will forget my love and service to him while I am gone and someone else is in my place.
You know I do, because I called you by your name, "villain."
He speaks bluntly, madam. He's a better soldier than a scholar.
Yes, sir.  I have indeed.
Alas! Hes dead. Hes dead. Hes dead! Were done for, lady, done for! Curse the day! Hes gone. Hes killed. Hes dead!
Good morning, father.
Get away, inhuman dog! Unholy slave! Soldiers, help our uncle take him away.
My eyes are full of tears, I cant see. And yettheyre not so blinded by salt water that they cant see the traitors in front of them. But if I look at myself, I see that Im a traitor too, for allowing myself to be deposed, making a glorious sovereign a slave, proud majesty a subject, a king a peasant.
That's enoughyou're a dull, dry fool. I'm tired of you. Besides, you're getting unreliable.
The heavens have blessed you with a good son, who will comfort you when the king is gone.
Yes, madam. But I have to laugh when I think that the baby stopped crying and said, Yes. Whats more, I swear she had a bump on her forehead as big as a roosters testicle. It was quite a knock she took, and she was crying bitterly. Yes, said my husband, Did you fall on your face? Youll fall backward when you grow up, wont you, Jule? And she stopped crying and said, Yes.
[Speaking of the content of his poem] I have written down here that the goddess Fortune is sitting high atop her throne on a beautiful hill. The base of the mountain is surrounded by men of all stations, all dispositions, all trying their hardest to get richer while on earth. Among all of these men, who watch Fortune attentively, I have one meant to represent Lord Timon, whom Fortune beckons to her, instantly transforming all of the other men, his rivals, into servants and slaves.
The old priest at Saint Luke's Church is at your service at all hours.
They're ready, sir. The oats have all eaten the horses.
The lighter it gets, the darker is our misery.
What do you mean, "neither?"
It sounds excellent. Please let me have it.
Then we might as well say that they aren't dead. But, you devilish scoundrel, they are dead, and you killed them.
Indeed, to
Oh heavens! Oh, wife, look at how our daughter bleeds! That dagger is in the wrong place. It should be in the empty sheath on the back of that Montague, but instead is misplaced, sheathed in my daughters chest.
I'd hate to even be a bystander overhearing someone talk about Hermione that wayI'd have to fight them. For goodness' sake, you've never said anything that made you look as badly as you do now. Just to repeat what you said would be a crime, even if it were true.
[As LUCENTIO] Call an officer.
Nothing, my lord, unlessI don't know.
Everything is fine, my sweet. Go back to bed. [To MONTANO] Sir, I myself will tend to your wounds. Someone lead him away.
[To TIMON] Let's walk and talk.
None at all, and I don't even know him.
Look, I have a weapon. A better sword has never graced a soldier's scabbard. I remember times when, with this little arm and good sword of mine, I made my way through obstacles more than twenty times as tough as you. But what a pointless boast that is! Who can control his fate? I can't now. Don't worry, even though I am carrying a weapon. This is the end of my journey, the end of the rope, and my final destination. Are you backing off, frightened? You have nothing to fear. You could strike at me with nothing more than a reed, and I'd draw back. Where could Othello run to? Do you see how you look now? Oh, you woman with an unlucky fate, as pale as your white nightgown! When we meet on Judgment Day, this look of yours will throw my soul out of heaven and into hell, where devils will snatch it. You are cold, my girl, cold like your chastity, which never gave in to the heat of desire. Oh cursed, cursed villain! Devils, whip me until I no longer see this horrible sight! Blow me around in winds, burn me in sulfur flames, wash me in gulfs of liquid fire! Oh, Desdemona! Desdemona! Dead! Oh! Oh!
I've already finished it. It ends in "Margaret."
We have come to offer you our service.
Let's go to bed, knight. You need to send for some more money.
Save your "good morrow" until after I've been nice to you
Enoughdon't worry, I have it all planned out. No one has seen us yet, so no one knows which of us is the master and which is the servant. So this is how it'll go: you'll be the master, Tranio, and replace me. You'll maintain my rank, live in my house, and keep servants, just as I would do. I, on the other hand, will be some other mansome fellow from Florence or Naples, or a low-ranking man from Pisa. Well, that's the plan, so let's do it. Tranio, undress yourself at once, and put on my colored hat and cloak.
May God in heaven bless you! Now listen, sir.
[Looking at the jewel] It's beautiful.
Bound to himself? Why would he have a receipt, if he hasn't paid yet? Wife, youre a fool. Boy, let me see the letter.
Here comes the fool, actually.
[To MARIA] And hello to you, pretty wench.
Off with his son George's head!
Orsino, noble sir, I must deny those names you give me. I have never been a thief or a pirate, though I admit to being your enemy for good and solid reasons. I am here because I've been bewitched. I rescued that ungrateful boythe one there by your sidefrom the rude sea's angry waves. He was a wreck, and seemed past hope. I saved his life and gave him my love, without reservation or restraint, and dedicated myself to him totally. For his sake I endangered myself in this town, and purely out of love for him I drew my sword to defend him when he was being attacked. But when I was arrested, he decided not to endanger himself, and he used his treacherous cunning to pretend that he'd never met me before. In the blink of an eye he became a totally different person, and he refused to give me back my own purse, which I had lent to him just half an hour before.
Not I, my lord.
Good morning, Simonides.
My lord, there's no need for such an apology. I ask your Grace to pardon me instead. I've been so focused on serving God that I kept my friends waiting. But aside from this, what is it you want?
We are in great danger if the others do not bring Timon with them.
Iago is signaling to me. Now Cassio is beginning the story.
Now, good sweet NurseOh Lord, why do you look so sad? If your news is sad, tell it to me as if its happy. If its good, youre messing it up by telling it to me with such a sour face like that.
Throw your gauntlet down, but do it so that you may use your army to redress the wrongs done to you, and not to destroy everyone here. You can put your entire force here peacefully until you get what you want.
I'll be your guest, then. For me to be your prisoner would imply that I'd committed some crime against you. It'd be harder for me to do that than it would be for you to punish me.
[To herself] That's true. Such pearls make ladies' eyes useless. I would rather shut my eyes than look at them.
[Whispering] We must keep our silenceeven though it is hard to, when he's being this offensive. Quiet.
She is saying that you're going to marry her. Do you intend to?
She strayed, and she was a whore.
Orsino.
I'll send her to you right away. And I'll figure out a way to take the Moor somewhere out of the way, so that you can talk to her in private.
Lavinia, were you attacked, sweet girl, raped as Philomel was in the silent, vast, and gloomy woods? Of course, of course! Yes, there is a place like that, the wood where we huntedoh, I wish we had never, never hunted there!just like the one described by Ovid, made by nature for murder and rape.
Oh, he sends you here for a picture.
Yes, that Petruchio was coming.
Just like the audience at a theater tends not to like an actor that follows the star player, thinking him to be tedious, mens eyes looked at Richard with contempt; no one cried God save him! No one welcomed him back, but they threw dust on his sacred head: which he shook off with such gentle sorrow, smiling and crying at the same time, that had not God (for some purpose) steeled the hearts of men against sympathy, even a barbarian might have pitied him. But heaven has a hand in these things, and we must go along with Gods will. Were all Bolingbrokes subjects now, and Ive sworn to be loyal to him.
You called me "little."
Hes smart. Id bet on my life that hes snuck off towards home to go to bed.
I've never known a kinder, more honest man from Florence.
That's a good idea. Most likely, her beautiful voice and many other attractive qualities will allure him and get through to his deaf ears, though they're stopped up now. She's the most beautiful girl there is. She's with her students now in the building surrounded by trees on the other side of the island.
To celebrate a marriage of true love, and to give a gift to the blessed lovers.
Here comes the Duke of York.
No! My dear friend, no, please. My uncle lives under a mile away, and I was just heading there. I can get some money and anything else I need there. Please, don't offer me any money, I can't bear that.
The Bawd, the one that teaches you and facilitates your shame and wickedness. All right, you've heard I'm powerful  and rich so you're playing hard to get. I'll have you know, pretty girl, that once I see you, I'll pay you very well. Come on, bring me to a private room. Come, come.
I thank you for asking, noble uncle. Oh, my lord, you once said that lazy weeds grow quickly. The prince my brother has far outgrown me.
I wish you would have been alongside the ship, to have helped it, too, though that would have been pretty difficult.
I don't understand.
Very well, then. Put up your sword.
Stop right there, you scoundrel!
You hold your sword drawn out, and say peace? I hate that word, just as I hate hell, all Montagues, and you. Now let's fight, you coward!
Go, go away. Im not leaving.Whats this? A cup, held in my true loves hand? I see poison has caused his death. How selfish, drinking it all, not leaving a drop to help me follow after you. Ill kiss your lips. Maybe Ill be lucky and theres still some poison on your lips, a bit of medicine that will return me to my Romeo. [She kisses ROMEO] Your lips are warm.
Listen, sir, you're not looking for the daughter
She's praying; take her away! I wish she had never set foot in this house. Damn her! She's going to ruin us. Don't you want to do what women do? Come up, my little virgin pie with rosemary and bay leaves!
These traveling salesmen sometimes have more to them than you might think, sis.
Moreover, Roderigo's letter describes how Iago told him to offend me while I was on guard duty, the thing that made me lose my title of lieutenant. And just now, even though he seemed to be dead, Roderigo spoke and said that Iago tricked him and urged him to on.
My noble master! What should I do for you? Tell me. What? What should I do?
I do not know. I am sure I am not such a thing.
I mean, she's had a child.
[To ARIEL] Youll be free as the mountain winds. But first you must do everything I command.
Oh, you're giving me bad advice.
You tyrant, what tortures do you have in store for me? Stretch me on the rack? Burn me at the stake? Boil me in oil? What range of old and new punishments will I receive for cursing you the way you deserve? Your tyranny and your jealous fantasies, which were more immature than young boys' passing thoughts and more useless then nine-year-old girls' daydreamswell, just consider what your fantasies have done! If you can get your head around it, you'll really go crazy now! Everything you've done was just a byproduct of that. You betrayed Polixenes, but that was nothing; it just proved you were flaky and a damned ungrateful idiot. It wasn't so bad, either, that you wrecked Camillo's life by trying to force him to kill a king. Those were small offenses compared to what came next. You abandoned your daughter to the wilderness: that's not such a big deal (though even the devil himself wouldn't have done it). And really, it's not your fault that the sensitive, young prince died of a broken heart, from disbelief that his disgusting, foolish father would destroy his beloved mother. No, sir. You don't have to answer for any of this. But this most recent thing (and, gentleman, prepare to cry out as soon as you hear it): the queen, the queen, the sweetest, dearest creature is dead, and vengeance for it remains to be seen.
"Mates," girl? What do you mean by that? You won't have any mates until you improve your temper.
Have you ever heard anything like it?
Damn my luck! I won't mess with him.
Yes, my good lord.
You shouldn't look at it anymore, or you'll start to hallucinate that it's moving.
Why, there's a good girl! Come on and kiss me, Kate.
I have much in my heart, but  it must break with silence before I say what I think.
Why, Buckingham, I said I wanted to be king.
While we stood here on guard while you were asleep, we just now heard a tremendous thundering that sounded like bulls, or lions. Isn't that what woke you? It sounded awful to me.
Sir? My lord! The way you're looking at her is hardly appropriate. Your queen, before she died, was much more beautiful than the girl you see now.
Lets all sink with the king.
[To himself] That youth's a classy fellow. "Rain odors." Nice.
It's a joyless, sad, and black child: here's the baby, as disgusting as a toad among the fairest ladies of our land. The empress sends it to youfor it looks exactly like youand orders you to kill it with your dagger.
Come on, Kate, let's stand aside and see how all this chaos turns out.
It doesn't matter what he's accused me of in Latin. If this isn't legal justification for me to leave his service, I don't know what is. Listen to this, sir: he tells me to knock him and pound him well, sir. Well, was it proper for a servant to treat his master like thatespecially if he might be a little more drunk than drunk? Maybe I ought to have hit him first, and then I'd feel better.
Yes, if the devil tempts you to do good.
Sir, here's the door. This is Lucentio's house. My father-in-law's house lies closer to the marketplace. That's where I'm off to, and here I leave you, sir.
Yes, Lord Hastings gained his liberty by humbly bowing down to that goddess. I'll tell you what: if we want to stay in the king's favor, it would be best if we act like Miss Shore's servants too. Ever since our brother declared that Miss Shore and the queen are nobility, they've become great gossips in the court.
Why should I take your purse, though?
Come on, give it a try. Has someone gone to the harbor?
What do we care about that? You're wasting time. Let's go!
No harm was done. All that I have done has been for you, for you, my dear daughter. You dont know who you are. Nor do you know where I came from, or that Im of higher rank than Prospero, your simple father who is master of some poor little shack.
Damn him for this! What has happened to him?
Who has done this, Sir Andrew?
For sure. Before night falls, we ought to find what is offered freely in the light of day. Follow me.
Our credit's not as good as our property, and our property hasn't held up well. When we were young we could pick up lots of young girls, and it was easy to keep a roof over our heads. Besides, the fact that we're in the gods' bad books is reason enough to retire.
I must leave today, before the night even comes. Don't be so surprised. If you knew my business, you'd urge me to go rather than stay. And, honest friends, I thank you all for coming to watch me give myself away to this patient, sweet, virtuous wife. Dine with my father-in-law and drink a toast to me, for I must go. Farewell to you all.
The town is empty. Everyone is standing on the shoreline, and they're crying out, "A sail!"
Indeed, I will. Kneel and repeat your request. Ill stand and listen, and so will Trinculo.
May this fool die of a heart attack! Why are you obsessing over this junk? Leave the clothes alone, and let's commit the murder first. If Prospero wakes up, hell torment us from head to foot and transform us into something awful.
Advancement to the dignity and height of fortune, the most kingly symbol of this world's glory.
Your grievances! Why? Don't say anything against the prince you love.
I've heard, sir, that he's grieving his son who almost married a shepherd's daughter.
Perdita, I hope my plan works out for your sake! You need to hide yourself for the time being. Take Florizel's hat and cover your face, change your clothes, and disguise yourself as much as possible. I'm afraid you're being watched, and you need to get onboard the ship undetected.
That can't be, sir!
I'm through. Come on, you promised me some lace and a pair of pretty gloves.
Romeo, I have just one thing to say to you: youre a villain.
Stay yet another day, trusty Welshman: you're the king's last hope.
I'm paying your poverty, not your morals, then.
Oh, if only that wretch Cassio had forty thousand lives, so I could kill him all those times! Once isn't enough for my revenge. Now I see that my suspicions are true. Look, Iago, I let go of all my fond love; it's all gone. Black vengeance, come to me from the depths of hell! Oh love, give way to cruel hate! May my chest swell up with hate, as deadly as the venom of poisonous snakes!
Please give me your dagger, uncle.
No, if the gentle nature of my wooing words cannot in any way make you behave more mildly, then I'll woo you like a soldier. I'll rape you at knife point, and love you in a way that goes against the nature of love.
Why, what have you done wrong? Where is Lucentio?
[To her sons, so that only they can hear] What do you think, boys? Will you stay with him while I go tell my husband the emperor how Ive handled this new joke? Play along, be nice, and stay with him until I return again.
May God protect Ferdinand from those lions. Because Im sure hes on the island.
No, my good lord.
I've said too much to your heart of stone, and carelessly laid my honor and reputation on that stone. There's something in me that condemns my love, but that love is so willful and powerful that it ignores all condemnation.
Man, go away; you can't stay here any longer.
My noble lord
We care as much about you as a bird that flies south cares for summer weather.
You say you're my wife, but you won't call me your husband? My men should call me "lord," not you. I am your husband, your fellow.
I don't think you've been honest with me.
Well goodbye. Here is some gold.
Has it been declared that Richard will be Protector?
But oh, this god turned out to be a false idol! Sebastian, you have shamed your good looks. On the outside you seem perfect, but you are really a deformed monster because of your unkind soul. Virtue is beauty, but someone beautiful and evil is like an empty chest decorated by the devil.
I don't know you.
Here, madam:
I thank you with all my heart, Sir John. I'm in your debt for your last sermon. Next Sunday I'll give the church a nice donation.
If youre Romeo, sir, I would like to have a private conversation with you.
Make sure this cowardly and dirty town hears our troops approach.
No, if you attack all my friends again, I swear I will never listen to you. Goodbye, and come next time with better music to sing.
Come along, Mister Fabian.
What time of day is it Apemantus?
Please bring him in, and have him sing on the way.
If you mean it, ma'am, Diana's temple is nearby. You can stay there for the rest of your life. Furthermore, my niece can take you there if you like.
Ill attack you with my wit! Ill put away my iron dagger and thrash you with my wicked wit. Answer me like men. [Singing]When grief wounds your heart,And sadness presses on your mind,Then music with her silver sound[Speaking] Why silver sound? What does  music with her silver sound mean? What do you say, Simon Catling?
Tell them to come in.
Are you indeed?
I bet its a challenge to fight.
Where is that music coming from? From the air or the ground? Its no longer playingprobably it plays for some god of this island. As I sat on a sandbank on the beach crying again about my fathers shipwreck, I heard the music over the roaring of the waves, and it calmed the fury of the water and soothed my intense sadness with its sweet sound. Ive followed it here, or maybe I should say it led me here. But now its gone. No, its started up again.
Quiet, Hortensio. You don't know the power of money. Tell me her father's name, and that will be enough. I will pursue her even if her scolding is as loud as thunder in an autumn storm.
Madam, if I am successful in these dangerous, bloody wars to which I am marching off, I then intend to do more good to you and your relatives than I've ever done them harm!
I won't sleep peacefully at the Tower.
If I were greeting you ladies again in just an hour, I would be saluting you, Duchess of York, as the mother of two fair queens.
Yes, you were a woman-chaser in your time. But Ill keep an eye on you to make sure you dont stay up for those reasons anymore.
What a beastly thing for the gods to have you wish! If you were a lion, the fox would trick you; if you were a lamb, the fox would deceive three of you; if you were a fox, the lion would be suspicious of you when you were accused by the donkey; if you were a donkey, your stupidity would torment you, and you would only be the breakfast of the wolf; if you were a wolf, your greed would plague you, and you would have to risk your life just for dinner; if you were a unicorn, pride and anger would end you and when in your anger you rammed your horn and got stuck in a tree; if you were a bear, you would be killed by the horse; if you were a horse; you would be attacked by the leopard; if you were a leopard, you would be related to the lion and the crimes of your relatives would condemn you to death. Your only safety would lie in leaving one place for another, so what beast could you be that you would not fall prey to some other beast? What kind of animal are you already that you cannot see what you would lose in changing into an animal!?
That's to feel a story, not hear it.
Sir Valentine!
Why, lords, this is an outrage! Has there ever been a Roman emperor oppressed, disobeyed, and troubled like thisand treated with such contempt, simply for enforcing the law? My lords, you and the mighty gods know that whatever these disturbers of the peace say, buzzing like bees in the common people's ears, that what happened to old Andronicus's sons was just and legal. And so what if he's gone crazy? Do we have to deal with the consequences of his fits and bitterness? And now he writes to heaven for justice. See [shows arrows], here's to Jove, and this one's to Mercury; to Apollo, to the god of war . . . and these papers are scattered throughout the streets of Rome! Isn't this libel against the Senate, accusing us of injustice everywhere? Good ammunition, my lords, for those would say there's no justice in Rome. But if I live, his pretended madness won't protect himhe and his family will know that justice lives as long as Saturninus is here, and if she sleeps, he'll wake her and set her on them in fury.
Neither am I, and neither is anyone here except for you, Leontes. You're a traitor to yourself, your honor, your queen, your son and heir, and your newborn baby. You've betrayed them all to gossip and rumor, causing a kind of pain that's worse than the physical. At this time, we can't convince him to stop unless we remove the root of the issue: the completely false idea that's rotted his brain.
That's a good thing to do. If you can tell from what's left who he is and where he's from, bring me there to see him.
Aaron, it must; the mother orders it.
Fellow lords of Tyre, there's no need to question me anymore about the king's departure. He left his sealed letter of approval with me; that's enough proof for my role while he's traveling.
Even Northumberland, who was there, wept to see it.
I won't plant a single one. It'd be the same if my boyfriend only thought I was beautiful after I put on heavy make-up.[She hands flowers to CAMILLO] Here are flowers for you that close at night and open in the day to receive the sunshine. As midsummer flowers, they're the perfect gift for middle-aged men. You're very welcome here.
You'll need a beard and some horns if you want to be just like me! They say we're two peas in a podwell, women say so, and they'd say anything. Women are as fake as dyed-blonde hair, as stable as wind, as solid as water, as fair as loaded diceand yet, it's true that this boy looks like me. Come here, buddy, look at me with your dreamy eyes! You precious thing! My dear! My son! Could your mothercan it be? I'm going crazy! Madness is making me think this, making me believe impossible things, making nightmares a reality. How can this be? Madness and unreality together make nothing, so it makes sense that it would hook up with something, and it does, beyond compare, and I'm there alreadyso much so that my brain is sick and horns are sprouting out of my head!
My lord
Your lord knows my mind. I cannot love him. I'm sure he is a virtuous man, and I know he's noble, rich, and young. Public opinion reports that he is generous, smart, and brave, both gracious in his manner and good-looking. But despite all that, I cannot love him. He should have accepted my answer long ago.
Warm and moist skin means that you are fertile and have a generous heart. This hand of yours suggests that you need to be secluded, to fast and to pray. You need some discipline, for someone with these kinds of sweating hands commonly rebels against authority. It's a good hand, an open one.
I beg your majesty, know that he only spoke this way because he is old and sick. He loves youI swear it on my lifeand holds you as dear as his own son, Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.
Then come in here and speak with me. Or, unarmed as I am, I will attack you.
If Timon is there I'm going to leave a Fool with him. [To CAPHIS and the Servants] The three of you are assistants to the money-lenders?
Tomorrow at dinner, then?
And your horse would now make him into a jackass.
Never, I think, except when I've been put down by too much wine. Sometimes I think I'm no smarter than a humble, ordinary man. But I eat a lot of beef, and maybe that hurts my intelligence.
Um, the guy who's carrying her around like a trophyPolixenes! And if I had loyal servants working for me, that kept an eye out for my reputation instead of just for their own profit and gain, they would do what needs to be done to end all this. Yeah, you heard me. You, his cupbearer (don't forget, by the way, that I helped you get out of poverty and make a life for yourself, though you're clearly ungrateful), you who see clearly how wronged I am, should poison him. Put him to sleep for goodthat would be the best medicine for me.
He's alive, sir.
Just listen a moment, and then I'll never speak to you again.
I do, Antiochus. But your daughter is so beautiful that I wouldn't mind if I died trying to win the right to marry her.
You still have gold? I'll take that, but not your advice.
Oh, come on. Loads of people do as much evil as we do.
I will, my lord.
Stand up, liar. Though I wish you were dead, I won't be your executioner.
Everything you do is even more wonderful than what you did before. My darling, I can't get enough of your voice; I could listen to you talk forever. Your singing is like charity for my poor soul, and makes me want to sing, too. When you dance, I don't want you to stop, I want you to keep moving so gracefully forever. Everything you doin exactly the way you do itmakes you even more perfect than you already are.
God bless you. Whose voice greets me so sweetly this early in the morning? My son, jumping so quickly out of bed this early indicates some trouble in your thoughts. All old men have concerns, and these worries never let them sleep. Young men, though, should be carefree and without worry, and their sleep should be restful and long. Therefore, the fact that youre awake so early makes it clear that some anxiety has you in its grip. Or, if thats not true, then Id guess that you actually never went to sleep at all tonight.
Greetings, sir!
Don't accuse me of such a thing. I would rather have my tongue cut out of my mouth than speak ill of Michael Cassio. But I think that speaking the truth cannot wrong him. This is the truth, general: Montano and I were talking, and all of a sudden a man came crying out for help, and Cassio was chasing after him with his sword drawn. Sir, this gentleman stepped in to stop Cassio, while I chased after the shouting man, because I was worried his clamor would awaken and scare the townspeople. He was too fast for me, though, so I returned here, as I heard the clink of swords and Cassio swearing oaths. I've never heard Cassio talk like that before. When I got back here I found these two fighting, just as they were when you got here and separated them. That's all I know. In his rage, Cassio wronged Montano, who was only trying to help, but I think that Cassio must have received some strange insult from the man who ran away that he simply couldn't tolerate.
What does she say, my lord of Buckingham?
Farewell, good neighbor.
Then, my grandmother, you're admitting that our father is dead. My uncle, the king, is to blame for it. God will revenge it, and I'll pray earnestly every day that he does so.
Ma'am, if the queen agrees to send the baby, I don't think I can allow it. I don't have a warrant.
Banishment! Be merciful: say death. Exile is much worse to me than death. Dont say banishment.
I would be wicked if I had anything other than good thoughts about my grandmother. But good women sometimes give birth to bad sons.
Yes, with Cassio. If she had been faithful, I wouldn't have traded her for an entire world made entirely of gemstones.
Such comparisons will only make her own beauty more obvious. It will be like the masks that pretty girls wear to hide their faces. When they hide their beauty, they make us think of it more. A blind man cant forget the precious eyesight he lost. Show me any beautiful girl. What good is her beauty, other than a reminder of  a girl who is even more beautiful? Goodbye. You cant teach me to forget.
Really? Women, too?
It's probably useless, but we won't overlook anything that might help. And since we've taken advantage of your kindness so far, can I ask you if we could exchange our gold for food? We have some, but it's gone stale.
I tell you, man, it's better with me now than it was the last time you met me here. At that time I was on my way to be imprisoned in the Tower, accused by the queen's allies. But now, I tell youand keep this to yourselfthose enemies are being put to death today, and I'm better than ever.
Poor souls. It was heart-wrenching to hear them crying out for help when, truth be told, we could barely help ourselves.
Come here, nurse. Who is that gentleman over there?
Are you ready, sir?
Grandmother, one night while we were eating dinner, my uncle Rivers mentioned that I had grown more than my brother. "Yes," said my uncle Richard, "Small herbs grow with grace, while big weeds grow quickly." And since then, I've wished that I wouldn't grow so fast, because sweet flowers are slow, and weeds are hasty.
Why, sir, he's not coming.
[As LUCENTIO] Where are you from, if I might ask?
What do you say to an ox's foot?
He has, my lord.
What's the matter?
This is how it should be. I want to see the count. Yes, all right, go, I say, and bring him here. Now, I swear before God, our whole city owes a great deal to this friar.
Heres what I wantNurse, leave us for a bit while we talk privatelywait, no, Nurse, come back. I just remembered, you can listen to our secrets. You know my daughters of a certain age.
I will not eat tonight. Give me some ink and paper. Is my helmet's visor working better now? And is my armor laid out in my tent?
Oh, Setebos, these are really beautiful spirits! How amazing my master is! Im afraid hell punish me.
Who is it?
What's going on, what's the matter? Is this my old friend Grumio and my good friend Petruchio? How are all your family in Verona?
Out, you enormous devil!  See how you're hurting this man! Can't you talk about anything but ladies?
I told you this was coming when I saw the dolphin jumping in the waves. They say dolphins are part fish, part human . . . curse them, every time I see one I end up in a storm. Master, how do fish live in the sea?
Here, noble lord. What do you wish of her?
I'm not sure. I would rather take her dowry and be whipped in public every morning than have to put up with her.
Tell me what you did with the kings ship, the sailors, and all of the other ships in the kings fleet.
Where is he, in the name of all that's holy? Even if all the devils of hell are crammed together inside of him, even if a troop of demons possesses him, I still want to speak to him.
Farewell, farewell.
[Whispering] Will we let this fellow live?
Everything I said before I'll promise once again, and I'll keep my promises in my soul like fire is kept in the sun.
Speak well of me to your lady.
Stanley, Richmond is your wife's son. Well, find out what she knows.
What noblemen have joined him?
We are so indebted
Now youre abusing your face to say something untrue about it like that.
And who is pleading your case to him?
Quiet, he's waking up.
My splendid spirit! Was anyone on the ship so strong and steady that the uproar of this storm did not make him crazy?
Well, you'll starve then. There's nothing to be had these days unless you fish for it.
So be it. Amen.
If you still care about her after her sinfulness, give her permission to cheat on you. If it doesn't bother you, it doesn't harm anyone.
Oh no, whats your news? Why are you wringing your hands?
Nothing but my presence for now. I will promise him an excellent work of art.
And the one who has commanded us is our king.
Did I really have an assistant so honest, fair, and comforting? It almost cures me of my dangerous and violent thoughts. Let me see your face: you are definitely a man born of a woman. Forgive me gods, for assuming the worst of all men. I admit now that there is one honest man, only one. No more, I swearand he's just an assistant. How I dared to hate all of mankind![To FLAVIUS] You do redeem yourself, but the rest I did lay flat with insults. I think you are more honest than wise, because you might have been better off betraying me. Many do have second masters at the expense of their first. But tell me, please, is your kindness not a subtle, greedy, and self-serving kind of kindness, which hopes to get what it gives twenty-to-one?
"He who is dizzy thinks the world spins round"Please, tell me what you meant by that.
I was a poor groom of your stable, kingwhen you were king, that isand on my way to York I got permission to stop here and see the man who used to be my royal master. Oh, it broke my heart on coronation day to see Bolingbroke ride through the streets of London on Barbary, the horse that you used to ride and that I would so carefully saddle for you!
Please, no more. What you're saying to me is meaningless.
Then we've gotten rid of Litio.
It's been decided, but not officially declared yet. But that's the way it must be if the king dies.
Shes dead, deceased, dead. Curse the day!
The maids will feel me as long as I can stand upright. Everyone knows Im a stud.
You may, but it won't help. He won't speak to anyone.
Honest, my lord?
[As LUCENTIO] And you're not as well-dressed as I wish you would be.
It shall not die.
Did you say something, you rogue? [He hits RODERIGO]
I wish I were your bird.
I agree completely. The Turks cannot be headed for Rhodes.
Oh, do you think well ever meet again?
Admired Miranda! You do indeed deserve the utmost admiration, as much as the most treasured thing in the world! Ive looked at many women with great enjoyment. And I've been entranced by the sweet sounds of their voices in my ear, which too eagerly heard their words. There have been several women whom I liked for the multiple good qualities they had. But every one of them had some bad trait that contrasted with and outweighed even their best qualities. But you, oh you, are perfect, beyond compare, and are made out of the best qualities possible in a woman.
As chaste as me? Shame on you!
On Thursday, sir? Thats extremely soon.
Yes, I swear on my honor.
And I wouldn't ask for any bridal dowry except for her to come up with another joke like this.
Sir, I haven't seen the prince for three days. I'm not sure what he's up to, but I have noticed that he's been away from court a lot and that he's been neglecting his princely duties more than usual.
Now bless you! Get up; you are my child. Bring me fresh clothes. She's my daughter, Helicanus. She's wasn't killed by Cleon back in Tarsus like she should have been. She can tell you everything, but first kneel and acknowledge her as your princess. Who is this?
That will be when your first queen breathes again, and not a moment sooner.
What does that have to do with anything?
I will go as quickly as I can, my lord.
Iago is most honest. Good night, Michael. Come speak with me tomorrow as soon as you're up. [To DESDEMONA] Come with me, my dear love. Now that we're married, the consummation is to follow. We have not yet enjoyed that benefit. Good night.
I hear a noise. Lady, come with me from this tomb of death, sickness, and unnatural sleep. A power greater than us has ruined our plans. Come, come away. Your husband lies dead, resting against your chest. Paris is dead too. Come, Ill bring you to join a sisterhood of holy nuns. Dont wait here asking questions. The watch is coming. Come, come with me, good Juliet. I dare not stay any longer.
No, I find men who do things like that to be acting below their social rank. Anyways, heaven is the final judge of us all, and some souls must go to heaven while others go to hell.
I'm speaking for the kingmy looks are my own.
Spirit, have you created and controlled the storm exactly as I told you to?
But sir, you don't know any such house or any such maid, or any of the men you dreamed up, like Stephen Sly and Old John Naps of Greet, and Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell, and twenty more names like thismen who never existed.
Which for some reasons, sir, I will see. I fear, I fear
[To ALONSO] I beg you sir, be happy. You, like all of us, have good reasons to be joyful. The fact that we escaped the shipwreck with our lives far outweighs what we lost. Many people have also experienced what we have to feel sad about. Every day some sailors wife, the owner of some merchant ship, and the merchant who owns the cargo on that ship all experience the same sort of loss. But the miraclethe fact that we survivedhas only been experienced by a few people out of millions. So, good sir, be wise, and weigh our sorrow against what should bring us happiness.
My servant, sir! The world has gone downhill since false humility started passing for a compliment. You're Duke Orsino's servant, youth, not mine.
My lord, your response shows that you have a strong conscience, but your objections are trivial, especially considering the circumstances. You say that Prince Edward is your brother's son. We agree, but not by your brother's wife. King Edward was first engaged to Lady Lucyand your mother lives as a witness to thisand after that he was betrothed to Lady Bona, the King of France's sister-in-law. But when both these engagements failed, Elizabeth Greya harried mother of many sons, a poor widow losing her former beauty, a woman past her primetook advantage of his lust and seduced him away from his role of majesty. She led him to drop his standards and commit adultery with her. With him she conceived this illegitimate Edward, whom we now politely call "the Prince." I could describe even worse things, too, but I'll restrain myself out of respect for some who are still alive. Therefore, my good lord, even if you don't want to bless us and the land with your rule, then at least accept this offered crown to rescue your noble family from its current corruption. Return the line of hereditary kingship to a true, straight course.
You know what they say: when clouds appear, wise men put on their coats. When leaves fall from the trees, winter is coming. When the sun sets, who doesn't expect night? When storms arrive early, men expect a bad harvest. Everything may be all right, as you say. But if God wills it to turn out all right, that will be more than we deserve, and not what I expect.
Oh, they make her a thousand times worse! And she has such a gentle nature!
What do you mean by that?
This isn't helping your case.
Yes, I say amen to that, Gonzalo.
If it's the same one, or any handkerchief of Desdemona's, it is another piece of evidence weighing against her.
Angry gentlemen, obey my commands: let's purge this anger from your bodies without letting blood. This we prescribe, though we're no doctor; your deep rage will cut too deeply. Forget, forgive, find a way to get along. Our doctors say this is no time to bleed. [To John of Gaunt] Good uncle, let this end where it began; we'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, and you will calm your son.
If I believed you, murderer, then I tell you that I would scratch the beauty from my cheeks with my fingernails.
Do they wash Tybalts wounds with their tears? My tears will still be flowing because of Romeos banishment when their tears for Tybalt have gone dry. Take this rope ladder, this poor rope ladder made useless because Romeo has been exiled. He made this ladder to be his passageway to my bed, but I am a virgin and now will die a virgin and a widow. Come with me, rope ladder. Come with me, Nurse. Im going to my wedding bed. Death, not Romeo, will take my virginity!
[To STEPHANO] Ill show you every inch of good land on this island. And Ill kiss your feet. Please, be my god.
Go and make yourself look like a sea nymph. Be invisible to everyone other than to me and yourself. Go take this shape, and then return in that form. Go and do it, carefully.
Yes, indeed, if you're an imperial lady.
My lord, good morning.
We come from the moon, I promise you. Once upon a time, I was the man in the moon.
Devil, torturing me even before I've come to hell!
God give him joy!
Here, sir, take this ring she asked me to give you. [She gives ROMEO JULIETs ring] Hurry, its getting late.
What, did they never whisper so you couldn't hear?
Thank you. I will let you know when I'd like to hear your work. But don't go away. [To the PAINTER] What do you have there, friend?
We'd be foolish not to give in to your wisdom. Since you told us so, we'll go about our travels like you said.
Flag-bearer, what is Othello doing here?
You, Roderigo! Come on, sir, I'll fight you.
Go away, I cast you off. Let me enjoy my privacy. Go away.
Well, I must stop spending time with her.
I ask you, please stay below deck now.
And when she speaks, isn't it like a call to arms for lovers?
Oh, fate has played me for a fool!
At Pembroke, or at Haverford West in Wales.
My liege, my wife died tonight. Her sadness about my sons exile stopped her breath. What further misery must I endure in my old age?
Oh God, oh Godthat my tongue, which laid the sentence of banishment on this proud man, should ever take it off again with accommodating words! Oh, that I were as a great as my grief, or less than a king! Or that I could forget what I have been, or not remember what I must be now! Do you swell, proud heart? I'll give you some room to beat, since my enemies will soon beat both you and me.
[To FERDINAND] Take comfort, sir. My father is more kind and gentle than his words make him seem. The way he just acted is unusual for him.
By Saint George, I probably am too young for you.
Don't touch the boy; he is of royal blood.
Catesby.
What did you call us?
No, let them go. What a calm, quiet couple!
Welcome!
[Coming forward] My lord?
God forgive all sin!Did you sleep with Rosaline?
Hello.
You have nothing to be afraid of as far as that's concerned. Come on, let's dance. Give my your hand, Perdita, and never let go.
If I live to be a man, I'll conquer France and win back our claim to the throne there. Otherwise I'll die as a soldier, though I lived as a king.
The statue of Romeo Ill make to lie beside Juliet will be just as rich. Our hate was not worth their sacrifice.
I will run away like a dog so your heels catch nothing but my ass!
What is a pimp, fool?
Good Master Fabian, do me a favor first.
Good idea. Promises are all the rage right now. They open the door for expectation, whereas actions themselves are merely done once they happen. With the exception of the plainer and simpler sort, the fulfillment of promises has gone out of fashion. But still promising itself is current and stylish. The actual doing of the thing is a kind of statement that shows a lack of judgment in the person who made the promise in the first place.
Let him come in.
[Singing] Farewell, sweetheart, since I have to go now.
[Whispering] Quiet, I say.
[To the demon possessing MALVOLIO] Why, hello, my fine fellow! How are you, little chicken?
Oh, come on
Hes a bad person, father. I dont like to see him.
It must be some news from Venice. Here comes Lodovico, from the Duke. Look, your wife is with him.
I pray to God that you're right.
Im sorry about that, sir.
[To TRANIO] Sir Lucentio, this is the day appointed for Katherine and Petruchio to be married, but I haven't heard from my son-in-law at all. What will people say? What a mockery it will be to have the priest here, ready to perform the marriage ceremony, and be missing the bridegroom! What does Lucentio have to say about our shame?
Goodbye, goodbye. If you notice anything more, let me know. Have your wife look out, too. Leave me, Iago.
Go ahead, kill me with them.
Doubly divorced! Bad men, youve broken two marriages, one between my crown and me, and then between me and and my married wife. Let me unkiss the oath between you and meand yet no, since we made it with a kiss. Separate us, Northumberland; I to the north, where theres nothing but cold and sickness; my wife to France, from whence she came like the spring, sent back like the depth of winter.
They are.
No, I won't.
Not at all, not at all.
Shame on you, Sir Petruchio, this is your fault. Come, mistress Kate, I'll join you.
Now, sir, what is your sacred text?
"Remember who it was who complimented your yellow stockings"
Where is my lord the Duke of Gloucester? I've sent for those strawberries.
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemona?
A devil.
Here comes Sir Toby, limping. He'll tell you more about what happened. If he hadn't been drunk, he would have hurt you more than he did.
My Lord Northumberland, see they are executed.
Farewell for now, Verona. I have come to see my friends in Padua, but especially my best and most beloved friend Hortensio. And I believe this is his house. Here, Grumio. Knock, I say.
Good morning.
She took that ring from me. I don't want it.
[Still crying] Don't close the curtain.
Yes, if they had nothing else to live for.
My lord, wise men never sit and wail with grief, but find ways to prevent more grief. If you're afraidsince fear saps your strengthyou give strength to your enemy by your weakness, and so fight against yourself. Be afraid and you'll die; there's nothing worse than coming to a fight afraid, since to be afraid of dying is to make yourself a slave to death.
My lord?
For the love of God, someone get a doctor! Send one to Sir Toby right away.
I'm shocked. Why did you not tell me about all of the debts, so I could cut off my spending?
Well, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
Why, what's going on, Kate! I hope you haven't gone crazy. This is a manold, wrinkled, faded, and witherednot a girl, as you say he is.
It's not that I don't love you.
Yes, sir.
Oh, but I'm worried. How did you get separated from him?
Did your lord order you to negotiate with my face? You've gone off your script now.  But I'll draw the curtain and show you the picture. Look, sir, this is a portrait of me in this present moment. Isn't it well done?
Filth, you are lying!
I do. What about him?
There's a gentleman here[hiccoughs] Damn those pickled herring! They upset my stomach. How's it going, you drunken fool?
My husband!
No, like a grassy hill for lovers to roll around on, not like a dead body! Your body's not anywhere close to being buried, unless you mean buried in my arms. Come on, take your flowers. I feel like I'm acting in a community play; it's like this costume has totally changed my personality.
I have time now, my sad daughter.
As beautiful as a summer day; extremely beautiful.
[To herself] Oh, Hermione, every new woman makes men forget the old ones.[To the gentleman] Sir, you yourself have said and written that "Hermione was not, and will not be matched." Considering how you used to rave about her beauty, you're doing her a disservice now to say you've seen someone more beautiful.
Yes, when my father was in Rome she did.
And no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
Whom you were sworn to cherish and defend.
Its a good thing youre not a fish, or else youd be dried and shriveled like salted hake. Draw your sword! Here come some Montague servants.
What's going ? No one on guard? No one passing by? Murder! Murder!
[To SEBASTIAN] Don't blame me for being so hasty. If you mean well, then come with me and this holy priest into the little chapel over there. There, before the priest and under that sacred roof, you can swear your everlasting love for me, make your marriage vows, and soothe my jealous and doubtful soul. The priest will keep it a secret until you're willing for it to be made public, and then we can have a full wedding ceremony and celebration that fits my social rank. What do you say?
Pardon me, Bianca. I've been busy with heavy thoughts. But, when I have some time, I will make up for being away for so long. Sweet Bianca, copy out the pattern on this. [He gives her DESDEMONA's handkerchief]
I dont know him.
I commit the crimes, and I start the quarrels. I do wicked things in secret, and then lay the blame on others. I weep about Clarence, whom I've had thrown into prison, in front of these gullible foolsnamely, Derby, Hastings, and Buckingham. And I tell them that it's the queen and her allies who have incited the King against Clarence. Now they believe it, and they urge me to take revenge on Rivers, Dorset, and Grey...but then I sigh, and quote a piece of scripture to them, saying that God tells us to repay evil with good. And so I clothe my naked villainy with odds and ends stolen from the Holy Bible, and I seem like a saint exactly when I act most like the devil.
He's dead.
Where's the governor?
Please, hear her speak. If she admits that she flirted back, then I will no longer place all the blame on Othello. Come here, sweet girl. Do you see to whom, out of everyone here, you should be most obedient?
Goodbye. Be well!
Im ready.
No, I wasn't born in any country. And yet I was born, and am exactly what I seem.
How long has he been there?
Apollo is angry. The heavens themselves are punishing me for my injustice. [HERMIONE faints] Look out!
About your age, my lord.
Yes, my leader. When I was presenting the show about Ceres, I thought of mentioning Caliban to you, but I was afraid I might make you angry.
Oh, holy Friar. Oh, tell me, holy Friar, where is my ladys husband? Wheres Romeo?
But not a royal man, as I am.
Because I wanted to make sure that everything was perfect for you and your wife.
Please cheer up. You are a good man, and I don't blame you.
Do it, do it. Were stealing with a plumb-line and carpenter's level, like real professionals, if it please your Grace.
I see his feet, so it must just be a fairy tale that the devil has hooves. If you are a devil, then I cannot kill you.
I cannot blame her. By God's holy mother, she has suffered too much. And I'm sorry for the part I've played in her troubles.
No, really, I won't stay a moment longer.
You have forgotten. And so now you think its too much effort to walk along the bottom of the ocean, or run on the cold north wind, or do work for me under the surface of the Earth when the ground is frozen solid.
What do you want, sir?
[To OLIVIA] So you've been mistaken, my lady. But nature has fixed everything and drawn you to your natural orientation. Your love for Cesario was really an inclination for someone like me. You wanted to be married to a maiden, but you weren't actually deceived about that, given that you believed you were married to my sister.
[As VINCENTIO] He's inside, sir, but he can't be bothered right now.
We think you would best know his mind, your Grace.
Yes, my good lord.
[As LUCENTIO] But have you delivered the message to Baptista?
Why, my child? It is good to grow.
Now I'm not afraid of you anymore, boy. You young gambler, your father would be a fool to give you everything and spend his declining years as a dependent in your house. Ha, it's nonsense! An old Italian fox is never that kind, my boy.
[To himself] What I see and hear is like a dream! Love, give me patience to wait for a while.
Though this island seems to deserted
The kings ship is safely harbored and hidden in that deep inlet where you once summoned me at midnight to go get dew from the stormy Bermuda Islands. The sailors are all below deck, sleeping both because of a spell I put them under, and also because of how tired they are from all their effort during the storm. As for the rest of the fleet, I scattered them. They've all met up in the Mediterranean Sea, and are now sailing sadly home to Naples, believing that they saw the shipwreck of the kings shipand therefore the death of their great king.
You famous pirate! You thief of the seas, what foolish boldness inspired you to visit the enemies you once robbed and murdered?
It's good to hear children being obedient.
Do you have a knife? Come, give it to me. Here, Marcus, fold it in the letter, for youve made it look like a humble petition. And when hes given it to the emperor, knock at my door, and tell me what he says.
Well, sir, well. Death comes for everybody.
Isn't she beautiful?
[To EMILIA] Do your job, mistress, and leave us lovers alone. Shut the door. Cough or say "ahem" if anyone comes. That's your job, your job! Go!
And in doing that, hellish dog, you've undone her. Oh, let her good luck come to an end, and damn her disgusting choice! Curses on the offspring of such a foul devil!
Is Othello angry?
My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon; I've sent your letter to Jupiter.
They'll go on, Kate, at your command.Obey the bride, you guests who attend on her. Go to the feast, party and be merry, get drunk toasting to her virginity! Be wild and happy, or else go hang yourselves. But as for my pretty Kate, she must go with me. Now, don't look threatening, or stamp your feet, or glare, or worry. I will be the master of what is mine. She is my possession now, my propertylike my house, my household stuff, my field, my barn, my horse, my ox, my donkey, my anything. And here she stands. Touch her if you dare! I'll attacklegally and otherwiseany man in Padua who stands in my way, no matter what his rank.Grumio, draw your sword, we are surrounded by thieves! Rescue your mistress, if you have any manliness in you!Don't be afraid, sweet girl, no one will touch you. I'll shield you against a million of them, Kate.
[As CAMBIO] Well, mistress, then I have no reason to stay any longer.
I will. What's the matter?
Then don't walk around too conspicuously.
[Standing up] Then tell me to kill myself, and I will do it.
Don't look so pale, Bianca. Your father won't be angry with you.
[Offstage] Hey! My lord, my lord!
Anyone who's not with us is against us.
Then you'll lose your arms. If you strike me, then you're no gentleman, and if you're not a gentleman, then you have no arms.
Well never run in our army, Sir Monster.
[Offstage] A sail, a sail, a sail!
Most sweet lady
I was provoked by her lying tongue, which tried to lay guilt on my guiltless shoulders.
Stanley, what's the news?
In all seriousness though, my son Petruchio, I think you have the biggest shrew of all.
Where are your sister and Hortensio's wife?
Where are you taking me?
I am so blessedI knew it; I was right. If only I knew less! This blessing is a curse! If someone has a cup with a poisonous spider hiding in it, he can drink and not be poisoned because his knowledge isn't infected. But if you pull the spider out of the cup, show it to him, and explain that he just drank poison, he'll start vomiting. I have drunk, and seen the spider. Camillo was his accomplice; they're planning to kill me and take over my throne. Everything I suspected turned out to be true. That dirty liarwho worked for me was a double agent working for Polixenes. He figured out what I knew, but I'm still in their clutches and they're still playing me for a fool.[To FIRST LORD] How were they able to open the gates?
When was this?
The first one profaned, the second dishonored, and the third stolen.
Well, you should do everything you can to win. Even if it was to gain just twenty kingdoms, I'd say you were right to do it.
Sweet lady, your eyes have infected mine with love.
Your Grace can do as he pleases.
May some devil whisper curses in my ear and give me the words, so that I can say all the venomous things that are in my heart!
He wonders why you have assembled such a large group of citizens to come to him without warning him beforehand. He fears that you mean him harm, my lord.
I think he's a stranger. His shield design is a dead tree branch with only a little green at the top. The motto is, "This hope keeps me alive."
Yes, sir, I will, and you can help me bury him.
Ill get them, sir.
[Singing]What is love? It's not the future.Joy in the present means present laughter.What's to come is still unsure.There's no reward for wasting time.So come kiss me while you're sweet and twenty.Youthful beauty will not endure.
Son, I'll take half your bet that Bianca comes.
Sir, I think you're familiar with my reputation for service through the work I've done for your father.
What would you compare your flatterers to?
No. So help me God, they didn't say a word, but just sat there like silent statues or breathing stones. They looked at each other and turned deadly pale, and when I saw this, I scolded them and asked the mayor what they meant by this stubborn silence. The mayor said that the citizens weren't used to being spoken to except by the town's official recorder. So I made the recorder repeat my tale. Everything was "the duke said this" and "the duke means that," and he added nothing of his own opinion. When he was done, some of my own followers at the end of the hall threw their caps in the air, and ten or so voices cried, "God save King Richard!" So I pounced on that feeble opportunity and said, "Thank you, noble citizens and friends. This public applause and joyful shouting clearly shows your wisdom and your love for Richard." And then I broke off my speech, and came straight here.
Who infected her?
I beg you, please recognize me, my good lord. That way you can accept my sadness and let me serve as your assistant while this bad luck continues.
What'd you say, dummy?
My lord.
So what youre saying is that your business forced you to flex your legs.
What dowry should she have if she married a husband from the same social class?
Oh, here's the lady that I sent for. Hello, beautiful! Isn't she pretty?
My lord, the Duke of Buckingham has been captured. That's the best news. There's worse, but it must be told: The Earl of Richmond has landed at Milford with a mighty army.
What is that?
Iago, get me some poison this very night. I won't speak to her, so her body and beauty don't trick my mind again. Get me the poison tonight, Iago!
Camillo has betrayed me, though he's always been loyal and honest before now.
Hello, gentleman! How are you?
Have you forgotten your own actions? Has it been so long?Call the priest who was with us earlier.
Give me my boots, I tell you.
To the palace, if it please you, sir.
Good idea! Poetic justice! Very good!
Where is the king?
I'll be in your debt if you can do it. I'm a man who would rather deal with priests than with knights. I don't care if everyone knows that I'm not brave.
A little bit, sir.
Timon, what can I do for you?
I'll use your experience as a model, my friend. Just as you got Milan, Ill get Naples. Take out your sword. With one thrust of your sword, you will be free from having to pay tribute money to Naples ever again. And I, as King of Naples, will be your great friend.
Exactly, you could only be calling yourself a fool.
What did your song foretell, my lady? Listen, can you  hear me? I will be like a swan and die while singing. [Singing] Willow, willow, willow Moor, she was chaste and she loved you, cruel Moor. I speak the truth, so my soul will go to heaven. And so, alas, I diespeaking my honest thoughts.
I've heard that, too, and I'm afraid you've put your finger on the bait that's lured my son away. You'll come with me to the place, where we'll disguise ourselves and question the shepherd. Since he's probably not all that bright, it won't be difficult to get the story of my son's shenanigans out of him. Please forget about Sicily and come help me with this.
What, in the middle of the street?
Why, make a fire then, for I have caught extreme cold. Where's the cook? Is supper ready? Is the house prepared, the floor covered, the cobwebs swept up? Are the servingmen wearing their new clothes and white stockings, and the household servants their wedding suits? Are the Jacks and Jills in their places, the tablecloths laid outis everything in order?
You and your lesser friends performed well in your last task, and now I need you to do something similar. Go bring the whole group here. I give you the power to control them. Make sure they come quickly, because I must use my magic to give this young couple a show. I promised I would, and theyre expecting it.
Yes, thats my boy! Your father has often done the same for his ungrateful country.
We have: and when we did so, the Earl of Worcester broke his staff and resigned his stewardship, and all the household servants went with him to Bolingbroke.
Then let's sit down and think. My son and I will have some spacestay over there. Stay there; now feel free to make a plan.
Your Honor's actors heard about your recovery and have come to perform a pleasant comedy for you. Your doctors approve of this, as too much sadness has made your blood congeal, and melancholy can lead to more insanity. So they think it would be good for you to watch a play and direct your thoughts toward laughter and joyboth of which can prevent a thousand illnesses and lengthen your life.
No, when Proteus can't reciprocate love. Study Julia's heart, your first and truest love.You tore up your fidelity to Julia into a thousand false promises (which are now just lies) in order to love me. You have no fidelity left nowunless you maintain two separate senses of loyalty, one to her and one to me. And that's worse than if you had none. It's better to be faithful to no one than to be faithful to two women. That's too much for either woman to bear. You are a false imitation of a true friend like Valentine!
I don't understand you.
A king as despicable and unfit to rule as you can't do much more.
[To RODERIGO so that only he can hear] What's going on, Roderigo? Please, follow the lieutenant, go!
Poor Desdemona! I am glad your father is dead. Your marriage was painful to him, and his grief cut his life short. If he were alive now, this sight would put him in a downward spiral. Yes, he would curse his good conscience and stoop to damnation.
"There was a man
To you, who have neither honesty nor grace. When have I injured you? When have I done you any wrong? Or you? Or you? Or any of you and your supporters? Curse you all! The kingwhom I hope God will preserve better than you'd likecan hardly catch his breath before you start troubling him with your wicked complaints.
Well, you should start thinking about marriage. In Verona, girls from noble families who are younger than you have already become mothers. By my count, I was already your mother at around your age, while you remain a virgin. So, to be brief: the valiant Paris wants to marry you.
Theyre called Rape and Murder because they take revenge on rapists and murderers.
Go to the next room for a while. I'll go with you.
Asses.
Yes, that's certainly true. Those who play around with words too much can quickly make them changeable and promiscuous.
Truly, I'm going home tomorrow, Sir Toby. Your niece refuses to see anyone. Even if she did see me, chances are she'd reject me. The duke himself is courting her nearby.
The emperor, in his anger, will condemn her to death.
Why, no, sir.
You're all very kind, polite knights.
How's Mamillius doing?
Doesn't Jove have any thunderbolts he can use to strike down this complete villain?
[To SLY] My lord, you're falling asleep. You're not watching the play.
Why do you speak so faintly? Are you okay?
Dear general, I gave you no reason to kill me.
Where's your conscience now?
Monster, I will kill this man. His daughter and I will be king and queenGod protect our royal selves!and you and Trinculo will be our governors. Do you like that plan, Trinculo?
[Grabbing SEBASTIAN] Come on, sir, stop!
Dont worry about me.
It's a pity that the eagles should be caged while the buzzards are free to hunt.
Biondello, boy, go and ask my wife to come to me right away.
I will leave now, sir.
Set your foot against the ramped-up walls and they will open, but you should tell us before you come in peace.
Good day, gentlemen.
One of those Montague scoundrels would motivate me.
[Throws gage] I throw my gage down too, damn you, Aumerle, and will fight you from sun-up to sun-down: there is the sign of my honor, so accept the challenge, if you dare.
Yes, sir.
Well, you have comforted me greatly. Go inside and tell my mother that, because I made my father angry, Ive gone to Friar Lawrences cell to confess and be absolved.
Do anything but this. Empty trash cans, or clean up the beaches. Work as an apprentice in the prison. Anything is better than this. What you do? If a baboon could speak, he would say your job is beneath him. I wish the gods would take me out of here safely! Here, take this gold coin. If your master is intent to make a profit from me, let him know I can sing, weave, sew, and dance, and more which I won't brag about. I'll hire myself out to teach all these. I have no doubt that I'll find plenty of students in the city.
My deeds weren't so bloody as that, though we had just cause to shed some blood over that quarrel. We could have since resolved the matter by paying reparations for the damage we did to them in battle, for the sake of maintaining our trade relations. Most of our city did. I was the only one who refused to pay anything. That's why I'll pay dearly if I should be cap here.
He doesn't look so great from the outside, but in fighting he always proves his bravery. Indeed, sir, he's the most skillful, bloodthirsty, and deadly opponent that you could find in all of Illyria. Will you go see him? I'll try to appease him for you if I can.
It seems that you didn't love her, since you parted with her token. Is she dead?
This is a place of suffering, trouble, awe, and amazement. May some heavenly power guide us out of this terrifying country!
Not for bearing the likes of you, if you're talking about me.
I promise you, sir, you have nothing to fear. When we were boys, who would have believed that there were people who lived in the mountains that had pouches of skin hanging down from their necks, as cattle do? Or that there were men who had their heads in their chests? And now every traveler returns with word that such things are real.
With Desdemona?
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby, take your weapons, and may God defend whichever of you is truly innocent!
I love you more than I ever did.
But that you don't love me. Please come with me just a little ways, and tell me if I will see you soon at night.
What, talking with a priest, Lord Hastings? Your friends at Pomfret Castle, they're the ones who need a priest. You, your Honor, have no deathbed confessions to make.
Thank you, you brave men of this warlike island, who think highly of the Moor. Oh, let heaven protect him from the elements. I lost sight of him on the dangerous sea.
No, I wont hear it. How can I talk, since I lack a hand to accompany my words with appropriate gestures? Youve gotten the better of me, so dont say anything else.
Dear fool, because of my brother's death.
Yes, you're the one who wanted me to have her turn around and come back here. She can turn around all right; she's very good at turning on you. And she can weep, sir. And she's obedient, as you say, very obedient. [To DESDEMONA] Keep on crying. [To LODOVICO] About this letter, sir. [To DESDEMONA] Oh you are pretending really well! [To LODOVICO] I have been ordered to come home. [To DESDEMONA] Go away. I'll call for you later. [To LODOVICO] Sir, I obey my orders and will return to Venice. [To DESDEMONA] Get away from here! Away!
And did they do it?
My good lord, pardon me. I must obey your every order, but I don't have to do that which even slaves aren't obligated to dodivulge my thoughts. What if my thoughts are vile and untrue? After all, what palace is there that has never let a foul thing inside? Who has ever had a heart so pure that impure thoughts haven't held court with lawful thoughts?
How's it going, my sweethearts! We are like that picture "We Three"three fools together.
You've abused God most of all. If you really feared to break an oath sworn by God, you never would have broken the oath of friendship and unity we made to the king my husband before he diedand my brothers wouldn't have been killed. If you really feared to break an oath sworn by God, then the crown you now wear would instead be gracing the tender head of my childand both the princes would still be alive. Your broken oaths have resulted in many corpses, and much food for the worms. What can you swear by now?
Honestly, my conscience is still troubling me a bit.
I mean my reputation. Reputation, reputation! Oh, I have lost my reputation! I've lost the only part of me that will live on after my death, and what remains is some kind of beast. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!
Everyone shut up.
Thirty ships. And now they are retracing their course backwards, clearly sailing towards Cyprus. Sir Montano, your trusty and bravest servant, has sent me to bring you this news, and he prays you will believe him.
You say that he is imprisoned?
Don't worry about it.
Tell what you know. I promise that your child will live.
My lord, it is valued as much as its sellers would pay for it. But you know well that the value of things differs in the hands of different owners, and increases when they belong to masters of higher status. Believe me, dear lord, you would make this jewel more expensive just by wearing it.
Your life answer for it!
Yes, he'll weep stones, as he taught us to do.
Death and damnation! Oh!
Dont punish me. Oh!
I am sorry to find you like this. I've been out looking for you.
You're a god on earth.
The Senators of Athens send their regards.
May I succeed in my dangerous battles to the same degree that I truly intend to repent and prosper! May I ruin myself; be deprived of happiness by heaven and destiny; my days be dark; my nights sleepless; and my luck be bad if I don't love your beautiful, royal daughter with dear affection, pure devotion, and holy thoughts. Both my happiness and yours depends on her. Without her as my queen, death, desolation, ruin, and decay will fall on me, you, your daughter, the land, and many a Christian soul. It cannot be avoided except by this marriage. It will not be avoided except by this marriage. Therefore, dear mother-in-lawfor I must call you that nowbe my advocate, pleading on my behalf to her. Describe what I will be, not what I have been. Don't mention what I deserve now, but what I will deserve. Remind her of how necessary this marriage is for the good of the country right now, and tell her not to be foolishly willful about such an important decision.
Doesn't he have reason, Lord Demetrius? Didn't you treat his daughter in a very friendly way?
But even if it weren't recorded, I think that the truth would live on from generation to generationbeing told as part of legend and historyall the way until Judgment Day.
Oh, sir, I can be quiet.
There's nothing he can say, except that what I've said is true.
I dont know whether or not youre actually him, or if this is some magic trick designed to make me suffer, like I just was. Your heart beats like you are a flesh-and-blood man. And as soon as I saw you, the madness affecting my mind has eased. If it's actually true, then all of this requires an extraordinary explanation. I hereby give up ownership of your dukedom, and beg you to forgive me for the wrongs I did to you. But how is it possible that Prospero is alive and on this island?
Do you like pictures? We'll instantly fetch you one of Adonis next to a running brook, with Venus hidden in the rushes and spying on him. The rushes seem to move seductively with her sighs, just like real grass swaying in the wind.
Traitor, you lie!
Oh, shame on you, whore!
Here comes that rascal. Boy, where have you been?
Give your support to her idea. I swear by heaven that I am asking for her to come with me not to satisfy my appetite or fulfill hot urges, since those feelings of youth are defunct in me. I am asking in order to be liberal and open to her ideas. And if any of you think that I will be distracted from my serious and great business there if she is with me, may heaven protect your souls, for you are wrong. If winged Cupid should ever sew shut my eyes and blind me so that I am more concerned with my pleasures than with business, let housewives use my helmet as a skillet and let my reputation be completely ruined.
I'd like that very much. Good Grumio, bring it to me.
Be careful what you say. The priest is here. [In the voice of Sir Topas] Malvolio, Malvolio, may God restore your sanity! Try to sleep, and stop your silly babbling.
Very true, and only a month old.
What, man? Its not been that long, not that long. It was at Lucentios wedding. No matter how quickly the years fly by, its been just twenty-five years since we last wore masks.
Next Wednesday will be our coronation; lords, prepare yourselves.
Husband?
Death, which has taken her away to make me cry, ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
And she might have done so; seeing it makes me happy but fills me with guilt, too. She looked just like this when I first fell in love with her, though she was warm and living, not cold and made of stone. I'm ashamed. Is the statue reprimanding me for being more stony and cold-hearted than it?[To HERMIONE] My queen, your magic has conjured up all the crimes I committed against you and your daughter, making me think neither of you could ever forgive me.
Sir, with all my heart. And when you come on shore, I have another request.
I'm so upset; I'm about to start crying. My wife looked just like this girl, and my daughter might have looked like her if she had survived: she has my wife's thick eyebrows, her exact height, her straight posture, her beautiful voice, her sparkling eyes framed in rich eyelashes, with a walk as graceful as Juno's, and a voice that makes people hungry to hear her speak. Where do you live?
Don't lie about her birth. She is a royal princess.
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to you from humbled Richard, who voluntarily names you his heir and turns over his kingdom to you. Ascend his throne, and long live Henry, fourth of that name!
Oh God!Oh, Nurse, how can we stop this? My husband is alive on earth, our vows are up in heaven. How can those vows come back down to earth, unless my husband dies and goes to heaven and sends them back down by doing so? Comfort me. Tell me what to do. Oh, oh, why does God play like this with someone as small as me? What do you say? Dont you have even one happy word? Comfort me, Nurse.
Yes, sir, I have a handful of them. Although now that I've let go of your hand, I've lost the biggest joke I had.
What of Juliet? How is she? Does she think that Im a cold-blooded murderer because I corrupted our newfound love by killing her relative? Where is she? How is she? What does my wife say about our love?
Six or seven thousand, at the most.
Listen, a drum!
Have you heard, Cassio?
Take me to jail?
Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, I don't think it's appropriate for me to knock you here, sir.
I have just one daughter, no other family, to whom I can give my estate. She is a good-looking girl, barely old enough to be a bride, and I have raised her well to possess the most desirable qualities. This man of yours keeps flirting with her. Please, my lord, help me forbid him from seeing her. Otherwise I might as well have said nothing.
Your husband, who has to live with a shrew, projects his own troubles onto my husband. And now you know my meaning.
The Turkish fleet will be dispersed. From the shore here, the billowing water seems to touch the clouds, and the wind-shaken, surging waves, with their high crests, seem to spray water on the constellations in the sky. I've never seen such a rough, raging sea.
Out.
Indeed, sir, windbags!  They're the problem. But, gentlemen, here's some money for you. The general likes your music so much that he would like you to stop playing it, for God's sake.
Yes, Brother, and it's a sad occasion for both of us. Our fatherthe man who should have kept that titledied too recently. And the sadness of his death makes the title seem much less majestic.
You're a dog.
Will the king come, so that I may spend my last breath giving wholesome advice to his reckless youth?
[To himself] You honest lord, what you've said is true, since some of you right there are worse than devils.
Can this be true?
What? What? Say more, be clear.
It applies to you as much as to me, my lord.
Well, sir, her name's a word, and to play around with that word might make my sister promiscuous. But indeed, words have been rascals ever since people started needing written contracts to guarantee them.
And just in time, here comes Richard with Sir Richard Ratcliffe.
Hey, Grumio!
A good plan, my warrior king.
Can I continue on while my heart stays here? Ill be nothing but an empty body unless I go back to find my heart.
You, earth, your fertile ground births and feeds everything. You are made of the same hard stuff that puffs out the chests of proud men, though is also the same stuff that produces disgusting critters like the black toad, the blue snake, the golden newt, and the blind, poisonous worm. The sun shines its life-giving fire equally on all of these horrid births. Earth, give me just one poor root, which all men hate! Dry up your fertile womb so that it never gives life to another man! Bring forth tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears. Produce new monsters, never before presented to the world from your face which looks up into the heavens![He finds a root] Finally! A root! Dry up your marrow, vines, and grassy lands, which yield the sweet drinks and tasty food that grease the sides of ungrateful mens' minds, so that all that was considerate within them slips out!
[To ANTONIO] Look. Hes trying to come up with some new idea for how to help Alonso, winding his brain up like some kind of clock. Soon it will strike...
Dont talk to me. I wont say a word. Do as you please, because Im done with you.
Well, sir, then you should put on a happy face and go back to have dinner with Polixenes and Hermione. I'm his cupbearer. If he drinks an un-poisoned beverage, then I'm out of a job.
Most noble lord, if you swear this on your honor, she is his.
You've mistaken me for someone else, sir.
Now, I say!Be happy, good sweet Kate.Get my boots off, you rogues! You villains, now!
Ah, you are a mean-spirited man. You have an unbecoming disposition and it's pretty sad. My lords, they say, "anger is a brief madness," but this man here is angry all the time! Let him have a table for himself, for he neither wants company nor seems deserving of it.
Why, this is excellent wordplay.
Yes, and, as Adrian described so smartly, she was a subtle one in bed, too.
Do you feel for the person whom you hurt? I'd rather be alone.
If you are Trinculo, then come out from under there. Ill pull on you by these smaller legs. If any of these four legs are Trinculos, these small ones are them. [He pulls TRINCULO out from under the cloak] You're really Trinculo! How did you end up being this monsters excrement? Does he defecate Trinculos?
Oh, if you only knew how ambitious you truly are, even while you mock ambition! The more you make fun of it, the more obvious it is how much you care! Men who do nothing usually wind up at the bottom, controlled by their own fear and laziness.
Sir Hortensio, have you come to break up the fig? Let me say con tutto il cuore, ben trovato.
Is she dead?
Exactly. Come sit on me.
Accept this gift I made for you, and long live my lord!
It's been nine months since I left my throne in Bohemia without a care in the world. I'd be happy to stay another nine months, brother, except that I would owe you forever. All I can repay you with are my thanks! That being said, I'll have to multiply my single "thank you" into many thousands more.
[As LUCENTIO] From Pisa, sir. My father is Vincentio.
Good day, sir.
We'll keep listening to you if you keep giving us money, Timon.
What do you mean?
Definitely. You hear him cheat, see him pretend, and watch him commit crimes, and all the while you love him, feed him, and keep him close, knowing full well that he's a total villain.
[To VINCENTIO] Why, what's going on? This is downright criminal, to take on another man's name!
What comes next? This young shepherd speaks beautifully about a beautiful woman. I'd written you off but, since you ask, I'll listen.
No, sir, I said that his horse was coming, with him on its back.
No, cousinI'm crying instead..
If you want to live, go after him! Be like an arrow shot by an experienced archerhit the target I've got my sights on, and don't come back here until you can tell me that Pericles is dead.
That voice sounds like Friar John. Welcome back from Mantua. What does Romeo say? Or, if he wrote down his thoughts, give me his letter.
If my luck matched my desires, I'd try my hand at that.
I told him that already, but he says he'll stand at your door like a signpost or the leg of a bench until he is allowed to speak with you.
Women, probably. But men too, because they are men themselves. What would you do with the world if you were all-powerful, Apemantus?
Hey, Philemon!
The only fortune I need is your beautiful daughter; when my father dies, I will have more money than you've ever dreamed of. But, come on, let's swear to our contract before these witnesses.
Now come, please. I wish you would take my advice!
[As LUCENTIO] Why, sir, don't I have just as much a right to be out on the streets as you do?
I said, sir, that if you knew who my parents were, you wouldn't hurt me.
[As LUCENTIO] Mantua, sir? God forbid! And you've come to Padua? Are you so careless with your life?
Why, he's a devil, a devil, a total fiend.
Can it be? Will the punishment stick?
So, let's get some fresh ones, no matter what we have to pay for them. If we don't put any heart into this business we'll never succeed.
What's your reason for that, man?
Yes, it looks well made.
I will, my lord. May God give you good rest.
Just tell him that he won't speak with me.
See, she's going to speak to him.
[As LUCENTIO] Don't worry about the gods. Go on about your business.Signor Baptista, should I lead the way? Welcome! We'll only have one course to feed you, but we'll make up for it in Pisa. Come, sir.
[Reading]"God knows that I love,But who!Lips, do not speak;No man must know.""No man must know." But what's next? The poem's meter changes. "No man must know." What if she's writing about you, Malvolio?
[To MARINA] First, please note that he is an honorable man.
To prison, until it's time for you to go bear witness at your trial.
Good morning, my noble lords and kinsmen. I slept late, but I trust that my absence hasn't delayed any important decisions that required me to be here.
Oh ho! Do you see me now? Sir Toby himself has been told to take care of me. This fits exactly with the letter. She sends Sir Toby to me on purpose so that I can be rude to him, just as she told me to in the letter. "Cast aside your lowly outer self," she said. "Be rude to your companions, and be mean to servants. Talk loudly and often about politics, and make a habit of being unique and eccentric." And then she wrote down the ways I should go about this: I should have a solemn face and a dignified demeanor, speak slowly, dress like a distinguished gentleman, and so forth. I've caught her now, but it is really God's doingand may God make me thankful! And when she went away just now, she said "take care of this fellow here." "Fellow!" Not "Malvolio," nor anything appropriate for a servant, but "fellow." Almost "companion" or "partner." Why, everything is coming together perfectly, and not the tiniest amount of doubt, no obstacle, no incredible or unfortunate event could ruin itwhat else can be said? Nothing that exists can now come between me and the fulfillment of my hopes. Well, God is responsible for this, not me, and he is to be thanked.
When the queen's relatives rode from London, they too were joyful and felt sure that they were safe. And indeed they had no reason to worry. But see how quickly the day grew cloudy for themnow they're imprisoned at Pomfret Castle. Richard's sudden attack on them makes me worried. I pray to God that it turns out I'm being cowardly for no reason. Well, should we go to the Tower? The day has already begun.
[As LUCENTIO] God bless you, gentlemen. If I may be so bold, please tell me, which is the best way to the house of Sir Baptista Minola?
[To VIOLA] Come, let's go!
If you did, you would anger the ladies.
Ah, see, brave lords! When we're working together, I'm like a lamb; but when you cross me, the boar, the mountain lioness, and the ocean are not so powerful as Aaron in rage. But tell us, again; how many have seen the child?
That's true, madam, until I sleep with you.
Now, Catesby, what does your lord say to my request?
Now Apemantus, if you weren't so sullen, I would be nice to you.
Here, here, sir! Here, sir!
[To IAGO] Refute what this villain has said, if you are a man. He says that you told him his wife was unfaithful. I know you did not; you aren't that much of a villain. Speak, for my heart can't bear your silence any longer.
Tybalt did, who then was killed by Romeo. Romeo spoke politely to Tybalt and begged him to see how ridiculous the disagreement was and to remember how displeased you would be if there was a fight. All this he said gently, calmly, kneeling down with humility. But he could not make peace. Tybalts anger was irrational, and he was deaf to any talk of peace. Soon Tybalt attacked Mercutio, who just as angry, fought back. They thrusted their swords and attacked each other. Romeo cried out, Stop, my friends. Step apart. Then he jumped in between them, and forced down their swords. Tybalt, though, thrust his sword under Romeos arm, and hit brave Mercutios heart. Then Tybalt ran. But, soon after, Tybalt returned to fight Romeo, who by now wanted revenge for Mercutios death. They began to fight as quick as lightning. Before I could separate them, Tybalt was killed. As Tybalt fell, Romeo turned and ran. This is the truth, I swear on my life.
She probably thinks that Proteus has abandoned her.
Here she comes! She's as young and beautiful as the spring. She's kind to her subjects, and her noble, virtuous thoughts are well-regarded by all. Just the sight of her face makes me happyit's like all sadness and anger evaporate in her presence. The gods that created me gave me the uncontrollable desire to either be with her or die trying. Since I'm obedient to the gods, I pray they'll help me secure my future happiness!
Oh, then I see Queen Mab has visited you.
He'll think, based on the letters you drop, that they come from my niece, and assume that she's in love with him.
Don't take, good cousin, further than you should, lest you should forget that heaven watches our actions.
And must we be divided? Do we have to leave each other?
How!
Give it to me. [Reading] "Youth, whatever you are, you're nothing but a filthy fellow."
Why, that song is even better than the last.
Sir, I am one that comes to tell you that your daughter and the Moor are doing the deed at this very moment.
[Scattering flowers at the door of JULIETs closed tomb] Sweet flower, Im covering your bridal bed with flowers. Oh, misery! The canopy of your bed is dust and stones. Each night Ill water these flowers. Or, if I dont do that, the ritual I will keep for you each night will be to put flowers on your grave and weep.
Tybalt, my nephew! My brothers son! Oh Prince, oh nephew, oh husband! Oh, my dear kinsman is dead! Prince, you are a man of honor, and therefore must respond to this murder by killing a Montague. Oh nephew, nephew!
I have a cold and a runny nose. Lend me your handkerchief.
Hello, what's the news?
Thats good, my son. But where were you, then?
Unless the Turkish fleet is sheltered from this storm, they must be drowned. It's impossible for them to survive the storm at sea.
Sir Hortensio, for good friends like us only a few words are needed. So if you know a woman rich enough to be Petruchio's wifeand wealth is the biggest factor for meit doesn't matter if she's as ugly as Florentius' love, as old as the Sybil, or as shrewish as Socrates' Xanthippe. None of that would bother me, or make me less keen to marry her, even if she were as rough as the Adriatic Sea. I've come to find a wealthy wife in Padua, and if she's wealthy, then I'll have found a good wife.
Timon says the same.
Stay, please, and tell me what you really think of me.
[To MIRANDA] Oh, if youre a virgin, and you havent given your love to someone else, then Ill make you the queen of Naples.
Your grace has misunderstood me; I left his title out only to be brief.
Will you eat? Will it please your highness to enjoy the food?
Master, master, look behind you. Who's that, huh?
His letter's sure to be a work of art. But you won't deliver it, will you?
I did.
Well, I will then. Let them perform it. But what's a "comonty?" Isn't it a Christmas dance, or some acrobatic trick?
Never, my lord.
Just to the Tower. And I can guess that I'm going for the same reason you are: to greet the gentle princes who are staying there.
Can you give us some comfort, York? How is old Gaunt?
This sounds like a comforting doctrine of faith, one that deserves to be spoken of. Where is the sacred text your "holy message" comes from?
God bless you, sir.
Evil whore!
[Whispering]That's me, I'm sure.
Why, part of mankind.
Indeed, I will do so with pleasure, my lord.
We'll shed each other's blood into the earth from which we came.
And I wish, sir, that you'd thought this out in your head and never said it aloud.
Increasing familiarity can make people feel more at home, no matter where they are! This shadowy deserted placea forest that no one ever visitsnow feels better to me than towns bustling with people. Here, I can sit alone, and no one sees me. I can tune the sad songs I sing to the nightingale's sorrowful notes. Oh, you that live in my breast: don't leave my love's dwelling place so long without a tenant. Otherwise, it will become a ruin, and the building will fall and leave no memory of what it was! Revive me with your presence, Silvia. You gentle, beautiful creature: treasure me, your abandoned lover! What's this shouting and what hustle do we have here today? These are my friends that make their desires into their laws. They are following some unfortunate traveler. They love me, but I have a lot to do to keep them from committing uncivil and shocking acts. Valentine, keep away for now. Who's coming here?
Can he be angry? I have seen him remain calm when a cannon has blown his soldiers into the air and, like the devil, blown his own brother out of his arms. And now he's angry? It must be about a serious matter. I will go see him. If he's angry, it must really be something significant.
Be patient, I'm telling you. You might change your mind.
Well, what do you guess?
How does our general respond?
[To guards] Go, take him away, and hang him immediately.
Good sir, hold on.
Youre a liar.
He is our cousin, cousin... But it's doubtful that he'll come visit us in a friendly way when he comes home from banishment. Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green observed how he courted the love of the common people. He seemed to become very popular with them by acting humble and familiar. He threw away his respect on slaves, wooing poor craftsmen with crafty smiles and patience in the face of his bad luck, as if he wanted to make them love him instead of me. He took his hat off for some girl selling oysters. A pair of lowly cart-drivers told him godspeed, and he bowed to them and said "Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends," as if all of England were his, and he were heir to the throne.
Curse the day. Shes dead, shes dead, shes dead!
Oh, it's wonderful! Look how many beautiful creatures there are here! Mankind is so beautiful! Oh, splendid new world, that has such people in it!
Oh, then I see that you'll only part with light, trivial gifts. You'll refuse a beggar's request in heavier, more valuable things.
No, not a step. It's a common experience that we often pity our enemies.
Hey, man, you said you wouldn't beg!
Really, tomorrow.
Yes, the most beautiful woman I think I've ever seen.
Wait, don't draw your sword; you have no reason to be afraid.
Who provoked you to kill that brave and lively youth, Prince Edward?
I'm ready for you right now. You take the bill, give me the yardstick, and do your worst!
To bed? "Yes, sweetheart, I'll come to you."
What handkerchief? The one the Moor first gave to Desdemona, the one you so often asked me to steal.
Because you were born to conquer my country by killing villains. Keep your gold and go, take it. Be like a plague that ravages the entire world, or like Zeus throwing poison over some wicked city. Do not spare any with your sword, and give no mercy to the elderly man, as he is a money-lender. Give no mercy to false women, because they only look honest and are all whores. Give no mercy to young virgins, because those breasts that break through the lines of her bodies and into men's eyes are horrible traitors and do not deserve pity. Do not spare any babies, whose smiling only earns the mercy of fools. Think of them as bastards, whom an oracle has foreseen will cut your throat, and crush it without any guilt. Swear not to listen to any objections, and arm your ears and your eyes so they shall not yield to the yells of mothers, maids, or babies, or the sight of priests bleeding in their holy clothes. Here's some gold to pay your soldiers. Make a riot, and after all your rage is gone, damn you! Don't speak to me. Just go.
My lord, for all I know.
Noble Buckingham, your vow of friendship is like medicine for my sickly heart. Now all we need is my brother Richard to bring the blessed conclusion to this time of peace.
Goodbye, sir.
If you knew what's in my heart, you would be. My lord, give me your opinion on this. Was it a good choice for quick-tempered Virginius to kill his daughter with his own hands, because she had been raped?
And so will I.
And she would wish we had twenty thousand more.
[To CERES] How is my generous sister? Come with me to bless this couple so they will be successful, and have wonderful children.
Both, and women's sons too.
And this.
We'll do what we can for you.
The weary sun has had a golden sunset, and left a bright trail in the sky. This is an omen that tomorrow will be a good day.
If my business ruins me, the gods ruin me.
Have you convinced him yet?
I hope you have a happy and healthy stay here! Your father is a righteous man, and I've sinned against him. As a punishment, the gods have left me without any children of my own. Your father is blessed to have you! I would be blessed, too, if I had a son and daughter like you two with me now!
Drum up the march to Athens! Bye, Timon. If I am successful, I'll come back for you.
I see what's going on here. As a pickpocket, it's necessary to have an open ear, quick eye, fast handand a good nose, too, so you can smell out the good places to steal. This is a great time to be a criminal. He just traded me fancy clothes for my rags; I gained everything, and he gained nothing! The gods have clearly given me permission to do whatever I want now. The prince himself is up to no good, running away from his father with his whore in tow. Even if it were a good deed to tell the king, I wouldn't do it. I think it's more crafty to keep it a secret, and since I'm a crook, I'll do just that.
Now, by heaven, my anger starts to overwhelm my reason, and passion is working to take over my good judgment. I have the ability to make either of you regret this. Tell me how this foul brawl began and who started it. I'll sever my ties with whoever started this fighteven if it were my twin brother, I'd do this. We're in a town during wartime, and the citizens are all nervous, and you decide to have a fight between yourselves? At night, when you should be on guard duty? This is a horrible offense. Iago, who started the fight?
Yes, and that's why you're going to die.
And must she die for this? Oh, let her live, and I'll ruin her manner, mar her beauty, lie and say she is illegitimate, and destroy her reputation. So that she might escape being murdered, I'll say that she was not Edward's daughter.
I will be angry. What business is it of yours?Father, be quiet. He'll stay until I want him to.
We'll do that tomorrow, sir. First we should find a place for you to stay.
Unless people are lying, he's promised you more than that.
What an insult he just made!
Oh, thats awful!
I am Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby. I stand here ready in my armor to prove, by God's grace and my bravery on the field, that Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, is a foul and dangerous traitor to God, King Richard, and to me. And as long as I fight honestly, I call on God in heaven to defend me!
Most powerful, serious, and honorable sirsmy very noble masters who have proved to be good to meI tell you it is absolutely true that I have taken away this old man's daughter. It is true that I have married her. But this is the extent of my offenseno more. I am not good with words, and haven't been blessed with the skill of peaceful speech. My skill is in war: from the time I was seven-years-old to just nine months ago, I have used the strength of my arms on the battlefield. I cannot speak about much in this great big world besides wartime deeds and battle. Therefore, I probably won't help my case much by speaking for myself. Nonetheless, if you will be patient, I will tell you the whole straightforward story of my love with Desdemona, and won't embellish it at all. I will tell you what sort of spells, what kind of powerful magic, what drugs, and what charms I have used to win this man's daughtersince that is the accusation.
Cousin, come forward and look at this man.
Afraid? Do you know, but are afraid of what you know? Share your knowledge; it's in there somewhere, you must know. You can't just stand there and say, "I'm afraid to know." Camillo, your face is as white as I imagine mine is right now. I'm realizing this must have something to do with me. Something has changed forever for me, hasn't it?
Thanks for the compliment, but I hardly deserve it.
Oh, this is terrible! Terrible!
Madam, we'll tell stories.
I admit to ordering the cape.
All right, then, call her. [To her servants] You may all leave.
You've broken the law in the worst way possible, in shameless rebellion detested treason: you are a banished man, but you came here before the end of your banishment, bearing arms against your sovereign.
[Kneeling] As I told you before, Im enslaved to a tyrant, a magician who used his magic to steal the island from me.
I don't have it with me.
[To himself] Do you really need to model a villain in your work? Would you chastise your own vices in other men? Do it, and I've got gold for you.
Are you her husband, you wretch?
Ariel, you performed your task exactly as I asked. But theres more work required. What time of day is it?
[To herself] Hover about her, spirits, and say that she got what she deserved, since you were also killed before your time.
He is coming.
If it turns out that I can't, you can take me home and prostitute me to the lowest peasant that's a regular at your house.
Speak to meI'll answer for her. What do you want?
Very suspicious. Hold the friar too.
She conceives by me? And what does Hortensio think of that?
I am very sorry that you aren't feeling well.
Take comfort, my liege; why are you so pale?
Oh, stop thanking me. You can "pay" me when you leave.
Clever praise! And what if she's unattractive and smart?
I wish you more health and happiness, my liege, than I can give you!
Name it, fair cousin.
What do you have here? Ballads?
So Timon right now owes five thousand, plus the nine thousand he borrowed from Varro and Isidore, not including what he previously owed me, which totals up to twenty five thousand. And he is still wasting all of this money? This cannot last. Right now, if I want money, all I have to do is take a beggar's dog and give it to Timon. When he gives me gifts in return, it is as if the dog were made of gold. If I wanted to sell my horse and then buy twenty better ones, all I need to do is give that horse to Timon, and without even asking for anything in return, he will give me horses right awaygood ones, too. It is as if he has no guard at the gate of his house, only a man that smiles and invites anyone walking by to enjoy his house. This cannot last, and no man of sound mind could think his estate is safe. Hey, Caphis! Caphis!
[To the gentlemen] Please, don't push me, I'll leave. [To LEONTES] Sir, take care of you childsince she is yours. May God send her a guardian angel![To the gentlemen] Get your hands off me! All of you that are coddling his idiotic behavior: you won't do him any good, not one of you. [To LEONTES] Well then, goodbyewe're through.
Alas, Iago, my lord has called her a whore, and called her such serious, spiteful names that someone with a true heart couldn't bear to hear them.
So does mine. I wonder why she's not in prison.
I promised that we would all contribute and pay the expenses for his courtship, whatever they turn out to be.
My heart will sigh when I try to think of it that wayI know it's a forced march, not a vacation.
No, my good lord. So calm down.
Well, what do I need you guys for? I can carry out the investigation myself. I don't ask your opinions because I want them; I ask because I'm a generous guy. If you're too idiotic and inept to realize the truth like I have, then I guess I don't need your advice anymore. The accusation, the execution, and the stakes are all mine.
Good, Tranio, for the real Lucentio is also in love. I will even become a slave if it will win me that girl, whose appearance has bewitched my lovestruck eyes.
[Seeing MIRANDA] Obviously, this must be the goddess for whom the music is playing! Please answer my prayer, and let me know if you live on this island, and explain to me how I should behave here. But my most important question, which Ive saved for last, isoh, you wondrous beingare you a girl or something else?
You sad family, stop your mourning to pass judgment on the evil man who is responsible for all this suffering.
"M." But then the next letter doesn't agree with my name. This theory doesn't stand up to the test. "A" should be next, but instead it's "O."
Oh, why do we spend so much time hunting for the temporary approval of mortal men, instead of seeking God's favor? Anyone who builds his hopes on the airy foundation of mankind's approval must live like a drunken sailor on the ship's mastready with every nod of his head to tumble down into the fatal ocean.
Oh, my poor, bankrupt heart is breaking. Go to prison, eyes, so you will never again be free to look at the world. Ill bury my body in the earth, where it will lie motionless and share a single coffin with Romeo.
Whats the matter?
Would your greatness like to wash your hands? Oh, how overjoyed we are to see your sanity restored! Oh, if only you could better remember who you are! These past fifteen years you've been living in a dream. Even when you were awake, it was as if you slept.
Come here. Hang these clothes on this clothesline.
More wit! What do you say, James Soundpost?
Can a son watch his father bleed and do nothing? You'll die for this!
And so will I, uncle, if I live long enough.
Why don't you stay here and hear me speak?
Help, master, help! There's a heavy fish stuck in the net! He's as stuck as a poor man in a prison! We can't get it out. Hey! Here we go! We got it out at last, and it turned into a suit of rusty armor.
Sorrow breaks natural rhythms and interrupts sleep, making night into morning and noon into night. The only glory princes really have are their titles, which are outward honors for their inner troubles. They experience a world of worry about imaginary things, so that the only real difference between princes and peasants is the princes' outward fame.
Let me speak, as you have, and offer some proverbs that may help you to be happier with these two lovers. When there's nothing you can do to fix a situation, there's no use crying about it anymore, because you've already survived seeing the worst outcome of your former hopes. To be sad after something bad happens only makes it worse. When fortune takes something away from you, you make a mockery of your trouble by being patient. If you've been robbed, it's better to smile and take away the thief's pleasure of making you upset than to grieve about it, and rob yourself even further of good cheer.
You make a strong case and give me a pattern to follow. I'll follow that miserable example. Die, die, Lavinia, and let your shame die with you
What are you talking about?
I beg you, send someone to get Desdemona from the Sagittary Inn, and let her talk about me in front of her father. If she speaks badly of me, then you can take away my official position, lose all your trust in me, and even sentence me to death.
"Don't I have a friend?" he said; he said it twice, and asked it twice, didn't he?
What's her price, Boult?
What support did I have besides Edward? And he's dead.
[To FABIAN] He's offered his horse to settle the quarrel. I've persuaded him that the youth's a fighting devil.
What is this song?
I am as mad as he is, if sad madness and merry madness are equals.
And leave you out, Richard? Stay, dog, for you must hear me out. If heaven has any horrible plagues worse than anything I could imagine, oh, let it keep them until you've committed the maximum amount of sin. And then let heaven hurl down its anger on you all at once, you disturber of the poor world's peace! May the worm of guilt gnaw away at your soul constantly. May you suspect your friends of being traitors, and consider the worst traitors as your dearest friends. May you never close your wicked eyes and be able to sleepunless it's to dream some terrifying nightmare of a hell filled with ugly devils. You cursed, prematurely born hog, wallowing in the mud; you who were born a deformed child of hell; you insult to your sad mother's womb; you hated product of your father's loins; you filthy scrap of dishonor; you disgusting
Master Malvolio?
Give me your hand.
Definitely.
Why would we give it up? Is there anything wrong with working while we're old?
[As the Lords stand and look at TIMON] No, my lords.
He doesnt miss a thing.
Well, my good husband.
The shadow of your sorrow has destroyed the shadow of your face.
Neither would I.
Why, yes, she was washed and cut and trimmed, and it was good fun for those who did it.
Can we see him?
Oh, sir, just his servant, who's dressed up like the horse, with a linen stocking on one leg and a big woolen sock on the other, a pair of red and blue garters, and an old hat with some crazy decoration on it in place of the feather. He's dressed like a monster, a total monster, and not at all like a proper Christian page or a gentleman's servant.
Give us some gold, too, Timon. Do you have any more?
Then he has more power over you than I do.
By my father's death
I'll go there for you; for the common people won't do anything for us, except to tear us to pieces like dogs. Will you go along with us?
Gentlemen, I have to tell you that my daughter has decided not to marry for another year. Only she knows why; she won't tell me.
But this was only his dream.
To murder me?
Lovell, go as quickly as you can to the Mayor's brother, Doctor Shaw.
What, have you drawn your sword to fight with servants? Turn around, Benvolio, and see the man who will kill you.
About my height, because at Pentecost, when all our enjoyable plays are performed, I played the woman's part. And I dressed up in Madam Julia's dress, which fitted me as well as my men's clothes, as if the dress was made for me. Therefore, I know she is about my height. And, at that time, I made her cry in earnest because I played a tragic role. It was Ariadne's passionate sorrowing for Theseus not keeping his promise and unjustly running away, madam. I was so convincing with my acting, and even shed tears. Because of this, my poor mistressmoved by it allcried bitterly. If I didn't feel her sorrow in that moment, I should have been dead!
No, no, hes dead.
What does he say?
Please, since you're as honest as you are beautiful, tell the truth: tell your angry father that I never said or wrote anything proclaiming my feelings to you.
Have patience, madam. There's no doubt that his Majesty, King Edward, will soon recover his health.
Publius, how are you? How are you, my masters? What, have you found her?
I long with all my heart to see the prince. I hope he's grown a lot since the last time I saw him.
Sir, Prince Pericles is gone.
You can go straight to the devil! No one here can stand your "gifts."
Why, our army is three times that many. Besides, the King's name is a tower of strength, which the opposition lacks. Put up the tent! Come, noble gentlemen, let's survey the military advantages of this battlefield. Call for some experienced officers. Let's lack no discipline and make no delay, for tomorrow will be a busy day, my lords.
Little pitchers have wide ears.
I'm pleased that you feel like singing, but it would please me better if you cried.
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk. I come here because I made a promisethat God forbid a knight should violate!to defend both my loyalty and truth to God, my king, and my children, against the Duke of Hereford who accuses me. And, by the grace of God and the strength of my own bare hands, I'll prove him (by defending myself) to be a traitor to my God, my king, and to me. And as long as I fight honestly, I call on God in heaven to defend me!
Sir, we have to throw the queen overboard. The waves are high, the wind is loud, and this storm won't stop until the ship is cleared of the dead.
Cruel tidings! Oh, unhappy news!
Come here, man. I see that you are poor. Heres forty gold coins. Let me have a bit of poison, something that spreads so fast through the veins that the tired-out person who takes it will lose the breath of life as quickly as gunpowder explodes from the inside of a cannon.
When a master's servant behaves like a dog to him, it is tough. I brought this one up from a puppy; I saved this one from drowning, when three or four of his blind brothers and sisters drowned. I have taught him, even as one would say precisely, "I would teach a dog like this." I was sent to deliver him as a present from my master to Mistress Silvia, and as soon as I came into the dining room, he comes to her plate and steals her chicken leg. Oh, it's a horrible thing when a dog can't behave himself in different kinds of company! But, as they really should say, I happen to have a dog that is a dog indeeda dog in everything he does. If I didn't have more wisdom than he doesto plead guilty for his wrongdoingI really think he would have been hanged for it. For as sure as I live, he's suffered for it, as you'll see. He thrusts me himself into the company of three or four gentlemanly dogs under the Duke's table. He had not been there (pardon my language) as long as the time it takes to pissand everybody in the room smelled him. "Out with the dog!" someone says. "What dog is that?" someone else says. "Whip him!" a third says. "Hang him up" says the Duke. Since I have known the smell before, I knew it was Crab. So I go to the man that whips the dogs: "Friend," I say, "are you going to whip the dog?" "Yes, I am" he says. "You'll make things even worse for him if you do," I say. "I was the one who did the thing you know about." He makes no more fuss about it, but whips me out of the room. How many masters would do this for their servants? No, I swear, I have sat in the stocks for sausages he has stolen. Otherwise, he would have been executed. I have also been punished for geese he has killed. Otherwise, he would have suffered for it. Don't think about this now. No, I remember the trick you played on me when I left Madam Silvia. Didn't I ask you to always pay attention to me, just like I pay attention to you? When did you see me raise up my leg and urinate onto a gentlewoman's skirt? Have you ever seen me do such a trick?
May she be be honest for a long time. And that you will think she's honest for a long time.
No, my dear lady. But I also swear that I'm not the same person as the part I'm playing. Are you the lady of the house?
More confirmation! Give him a hug, Thaisa, this is Helicanus. Now I want to know how you were found, how you survived, and who I should thank (besides the gods) for this miracle.
The man who needs to ask. You poor idiots, working for money-lenders. You're like whores who shuttle between money and greed?
I have heard you speak too much, and your actions and words don't match up.
My lieutenant, and the servants of the Duke? May this good night be a blessing to you, friends! What's the news?
His determination soars to such heights! Thomas of Norfolk, how do you respond to this?
Where the devil is Romeo? Did he come home last night?
I'll never marry a banker!
Please, put away your knife and show some wits.
This spirit is torturing me. Oh!
Trust me, I worry it has. Please consider that what I am saying comes from my love for you. But I see you really are affected by what I've said. I only meant to warn you to be a little suspicious. I beg you not to make more out of this than you should.
Oh God, did Romeos hand shed Tybalts blood?
Why?
This costume looks good on you! You're not a shepherdess; you're Flora, the goddess of spring. This sheep-shearing festival is a meeting of the gods, and you're the queen of all of them.
So is he lazy then?
What's wrong with youwhy do you look so wild?
Blessed? As if. She drinks the same wine we do. If she was really blessed, she never would have fallen in love with the Moor. Blessed? Nonsense! Didn't you see her playing with Cassio's hand? Didn't you notice that?
Sheathe your shiny swords, or the dew will make them rust. Good sir, your old age commands more respect than your weapons do.
To God, the champion and defender of widows.
Sit, sir, and I'll tell you. But, as you can see, I'll be interrupted...
Here it comes.
But there is no man who would do such a thing. It is impossible.
She would, and she'd force me to murder my new wife.
What noblemen have been killed on either side?
Yes, in the twinkling of an eye.
Yes, now he'll have a lively widow for himself. He claims he'll woo her and marry her in a day.
Oh, Ratcliffe, I'm afraid, I'm afraid.
My noble lord
What's the news? Who has arrived?
Why would you cage her up in place of this fiend from hell, Sir Baptista, and punish her for her sister's tongue?
I see what you areyou're too proud. But even if you were the devil, you'd still be beautiful. My lord and master loves you. Such love as his couldn't be repaid even if you were crowned the most beautiful woman in the world.
To raise foolish children and tally household expenditures.
Be quiet, and stay still.
All the better for him. I wish I could be Lucentio too.
If you'll get rid of your servants, ma'am, I can bring Emilia out.
Things that taste sweet are difficult to digest. You asked my opinion as a judge, but I would rather you had asked me to argue as a father. Oh, had it been a stranger, not my child, I would have gone easier on him; I tried to avoid looking prejudiced, but destroyed my own life in the process. I hoped that some of you would say that I was being too harsh to my own son, but you allowed me to wrong myself.
Where would you send it?
Never, my lord.
The biggest wave I've ever seen washed it up on the shore.
I brought my master news of Juliets death. And then with great haste he rode from Mantua to this tomb. [He shows a letter] Early this morning he told me to give this letter to his father. Then he threatened to kill me if I did not leave when he went into the tomb.
But did you ever tell him that she was unfaithful?
I beg your pardon, thenfor I thought you had called me all those bitter names.
This evening.
And who brought it?
Don't you think you ought to go to bed, Malvolio?
Monster, whatever you ask for I'll do, so long as it's reasonable. Come on, Trinculo, lets sing. [Singing]Mock 'em and shock 'emAnd shock 'em and mock 'em.Thought is free.
We could win him and his money over if the girl would just give in to customers.
May God preserve us from all devils like her!
At my house.
Dishonorable boy! Your lie weighs my sword to take vengeance, and so the liar and the lie will soon lie dead in the earth. To prove it, theres the sign of my honor [throws down gage]: take the challenge, if you dare.
Yes, madam.
Sister, let yourself be happy in my unhappiness. Sir, I will humbly obey your will. My books and musical instruments will be my companions. I will read and practice by myself.
I thought she must have some important business in that isolated house, since she's visited it alone two or three times a day every day since Hermione's death. Should we head that way and join the celebration?
Give me your torch, boy. Now go and stand far away from me. Actually, put out the torch out so no one can see me.
Is he sent from Duke Orsino?
I thank him humbly, and I thank all of you, too. But who's that, led by a Goth warrior?
Will you swear never to marry unless I give you permission?
The same thing I am doing now as I stand here amazed to hear you mention Naples. He does hear me, and it makes me cry that he hears me. I myself am the King of NaplesI saw with my own eyes, which havent been dry sincemy father killed by a shipwreck.
[To ANTONIO so that only he can hear] When we get another opportunity, we'll take it.
That may be true of people who've actually done such things; it has nothing to do with me.
And if I do get to speak to her, my lord, what do I do then?
Lady, the man who robbed you of your husband did it to help you find a better husband.
Why, what do you have to be afraid of?
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey have been sent to Pomfret, and Sir Thomas Vaughan with them. They're all prisoners.
Everything has changed so much!
That late?
I'm his friend, sir, and I would do more to you for his sake than whatever he might have said he would .
And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?
Lose nothing? No, youd get bigger. Men make women bigger.
[As VINCENTIO] Yes, sir, or so his mother tells me, if I can believe her.
Sir Proteus, what does Silvia say about my wooing?
Boy, you don't know how to love like I do.
Low-born men enrich themselves by his property.
Don't get up yet. [He kneels down as well] May the stars in the sky, and the sky itself be my witnesses: Iago hereby dedicates all of his wit, strength, and heart to helping Othello, who has been wronged. Whatever he commands, I will obey, whatever bloody task he gives me.
And Trinculo is so drunk that he's staggering. Where did they find the powerful liquor that has made them so drunk?[To TRINCULO] How did you get so drunk?
Well, especially after seeing that you are well, too.
Thanks, lovely Lucius; what's the news?
Good pilgrim, you are unfair to your hand. Your hand shows proper devotion by touching mine, just as pilgrims reach out to touch the hands of saints. Holding palm to palm is like a pilgrims kiss.
They knock again!Whos there?Romeo, stand up. Theyll catch you. Hold on a moment.Romeo, stand up.
You can tell by our sunken cheeks and hollow eyes.
I'm only saying what I know to be true. I'm being completely honest with you.
I suppose you're right.
He wouldn't when I asked! Hermione, you've never spoken better.
Will you come to bed, my lord?
Hello, noble General.
He said he would go to the slums and take a glove from a beggar, and wear it as a favor, and with that would defeat the champion in a joust.
Would you force me into a world of worries? Call them back then. I am not made of stone. I can be persuaded by these kind pleas, even though it goes against my conscience and my soul.
Yes, yes, the ladder.
Did you see that, Hostilius?
That's good advice.
Ma'am, this letter and some jewelry were in your coffin with you. Here they are; they're yours. Do you recognize the handwriting?
Claribel, who is now Queen of Tunis, and who lives thirty miles farther than a lifetime's journey from Italy. She wouldn't even receive a letter from Italy (unless it could somehow be delivered by the light of the sun; the man in the moon's too slow to deliver it) in less than the time it takes a baby to grow old enough to shave. Claribel was the cause of our ship getting swallowed by the sea, though some of us survivedand our survival suggests that it is our destiny to perform an act that, in fact, reenacts the past.
My lord, you are foolishly stubborn, and too tied to formalities and traditions. Consider the moral roughness of these times, and you'll see that you're not really breaking sanctuary in seizing him. The benefit of sanctuary is always given to those who really deserve protection, or those who are smart enough to claim it. This prince has neither claimed it nor does he deserve it. Therefore, in my opinion, he cannot have it. If you seize him from sanctuary when he was never really taking sanctuary in the first place, then you aren't breaking any laws or traditions. I've often heard of "sanctuary men," but until now I've never heard of "sanctuary children."
He is as dead as I am alive, my lord.
Really, rumor has it that you are going to marry her.
A message from whom?
Can you ask around and find out?
Sure, I'll do it tomorrow morning, I swear. My lady would give a lot to keep from losing him.
Explain yourself quickly, before this speech about your kindness outlasts whatever kindness you have.
Lead us away from this place, and let's go search some more for my poor son.
[Kneels] I kneel against them with my loyal joints! It won't go well for you, if you grant any forgiveness!
You will? Well, lucky me! [To POLIXENES] Brother, do you love your son as much as I seem to love mine?
It will be soon. Therefore confess your sin openly. Your denial of every part of it can do nothing to remove the horrible idea that I have in my head. You are about to die.
You speak as if I had killed my nephews.
No, not tonight.
Let me be caught. Let me be put to death. Ill be happy, if thats how you want it. Ill say the grayness over there is not the coming morning. Rather, its a pale reflection of the moon. And that isnt the lark singing in the sky above our heads. Id rather stay than go. Come on, death! You'd be welcome here! Juliet wills it. How are you, my love? Lets talk. It is not day.
[To QUEEN ELIZABETH] And during all that time, you and your first husband, Sir John Grey, were fighting for the house of Lancaster.
[To ELIZABETH] And farewell to you, sad old queen.
When holy and devout religious men are praying, it takes a great deal to draw them away, because they are so wrapped up in their eager contemplation of God.
Aren't you a poet?
If love is blind, it cant hit the target. Hell sit under a medlar tree and wish his love were one of its fruits, which women, when theyre alone, joke look like female genitals. Oh, Romeo, I wish she were one such fruit! I wish she was an open-arse, and that you were a pop her in pear. Good night, Romeo. Im off to my little trundle bed. Its too cold in this field for me to sleep here. Come on, Benvolio, shall we leave?
It is.
"Some are born great"
[Pestering FLAVIUS] Please, sir
A good woman, or not a woman at all.
All blessings to you, good Simonides!
Do you have permission to go to confession today?
Painful times provide no chance for love. Lady Capulet, good night. Speak well of me to your daughter.
What, are you afraid?
I believe. Your actions speak louder than your words; you don't have to swear. I won't cut my hair again until she gets married, though it might look strange. Goodbye.[To DIONYZA] Ma'am, please take good care of my child.
[As LUCENTIO] What's going on, what's the matter?
Die, madman, for this murder!
What, you're going to enter the tournament for the lady?
With who?
Oh God! Oh heavenly powers!
Spoken like a true buzzard.
Curses on the heart that forced us to this method! Write, good niece; and tell us, at last, what God wants to be known so that we can take revenge. Heaven will guide your pen to show what happened, so that we may know the traitors and the truth!
Desdemona deceived her father in marrying you, and she pretended to shake in fear at your looks when she actually loved them.
Girls who are younger than your daughter have become happy mothers.
My pretty grandchildren, you both misunderstand me. I'm lamenting the sickness of the king, because I don't want to lose him. I'm not lamenting your father's death. It would be wasted sorrow to cry over someone who's already dead.
No, tell me the truth, did he fall for my letter?
Peter, go back and wait at the gate.
Please, Nurse, I'm asking you to step, too.
No. It was already daytime when we left each other. Iago, I've been bold enough to ask to speak to your wife. I will ask her to allow me to see the virtuous Desdemona.
They also say that he gets drunk with you every night.
Sounds like he loves you a lot, if you're his whole life.
Sir, if I can get within gunshot, I'll take him out. Goodbye, sir.
Look, right there, look! Here comes one of his spirits to punish me for bringing back the wood too slowly. Ill lie down, flat on the ground. Maybe he wont notice me.[He lies down, covering himself with his cloak]
[Taking HASTINGS' hand] By heaven, my soul is now cleansed of all grudges and hatred. With this handshake I swear that this love is true.
Go, go into old Titus's sad house,[To servants] And bring that atheist Moor here, so that we can condemn him to some horrible death as punishment for his evil life.
That's the sculptor's skill: he made her look like she would if she lived now, sixteen years later.
Now I recognize you. When we left Pentapolis, my father, the king, gave you this ring.
Find the people whose names are on this list? Its written that shoemakers and tailors should use each others tools, and that fisherman should play with paints while painters should play with with fishing nets. But now Ive been sent to find the people on this list, and I cant read. Ill have to ask somebody educated to help me.
Look out, the drawbridge!
Come back and take an oath. Lay your banished hands on our royal sword. Swear by the duty that you owe to Godyour duty to us we banish with youto keep the promise you make here today: that you never shallso help you God!become allies in banishment, nor ever look upon each other's face; nor ever write, see each other in person, or reconcile with each other; nor ever for any reason meet to plot any ill against us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
Four legs and two voicesthis is a very unique monster. The voice near the front of him is speaking kindly about his friend. The voice near the back of him shouts curses and abusive language. Even if it takes all the wine in my bottle, Ill cure his fever. Come on. [CALIBAN drinks] Amen to that! Ill pour some in your other mouth now.
This is the only way, Sir Andrew.
Please, don't take it away.
That, I think, is young Petruchio.
Stop, no more. You're onto the scent about as much as a dead man's nose. But I do see how emotional you are, and I feel for you. I still have the capacity to feel.
He'll do whatever Hastings does.
And now here's the other paper from his pocket, an angry letter. It seems Roderigo meant to send it to Iago, but the damned villain likely killed him before he had the chance.
(From outside the door) My liege, beware; protect yourself; you have a traitor in there with you.
Well, I mean making him incapable of taking Othello's place. Knocking out his brains.
My lord, your promise of the earldom
Mine did too.
Get going, go.
It's very well done. She looks almost alive.
Whats the matter, uncle? Speak [wheezes]; recover breath. Tell us how close we are to danger, so that we can protect ourselves.
I know it now.
[As LUCENTIO] The very man, Biondello.
You're talking about killing?
[To CALIBAN] Youre lying, you most ignorant monster. Im so brave I would go brawl with a police officer right now. Why, you drunk fish, you: has any coward ever drunk as much wine as I have today? Are you telling such monstrous lies just because youre half-fish, half-monster?
You nymphs, called Naiads, who live in the wandering streams! With your crowns of grass and always innocent looks, leave your cool streams and obey Juno's command. Come up on this grassy field. Juno orders you. Come, chaste nymphs, and help us celebrate the engagement of two true lovers. Dont be late.
That's how it went when Henry the Sixth was crowned in Paris at just nine months old.
Tell your story; if you've experienced one thousandth of what I have, you're a man and I've suffered like a girl. You look patient in the face of death; you're smiling as if nothing had happened! Who was your family? How did you lose them? What is your name, friendly virgin? Please, tell me, I'm begging you. Come sit by me.
You could swear by every star in the sky and you could force the tides to stop ebbing and flowing before you could convince him that what he now believes isn't true. He's built it up in his mind so much now that he'll defend it with his life.
[To himself] He takes her hand. Ah, yes, whisper together. This is all I need to trap Cassio like a fly in my web. Yes, smile at her. I will use your own politeness against you. You tell her, "Yes, you're right." If these little gestures end up taking away your office of lieutenant, you'll wish you hadn't been so flirtatious and gentlemanly to her. Very good, you kissed her wellkeep showing such courtesy to her! Yes, that's right. Are you kissing your fingers again? It would be better, for your sake, if those fingers were enema tubes, to get rid of your B.S.
This news has killed the queen. Look down and see what death is doing!
Well, then, she has run away to find that peasant Valentine, and Eglamour has accompanied her. It's true. Friar Lawrence has met them both as he wandered through the forest, repenting. He recognized Eglamour, and guessed that it was Silviabut since she was masked, he wasn't sure of it. Besides, she was planning on going to confession tonight at Patrick's place, but she wasn't there. All of these instances confirm that she has run away. Therefore, please, don't delay by talking. Get on horseback at once, and meet me by the base of the mountain that leads toward Mantua, where they are going. Hurry up, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
No, two sailsa man in a shirt and a woman in a dress.
No, I know you're Sir Lucentio.
Sir!
I'll do it, but she is an innocent girl.
I'm not in a good mood, but I'm putting on an act and pretending to be jovial. Tell me, Iago, how would you praise me?
My good lords, I'll do the best I can.
Will either of you deliver the message of my challenge to him?
I'll be quiet. Im done. May you receive Gods grace. You were the prettiest baby I ever nursed. If I live to see you get married someday, my wishes will be fulfilled.
Well, what is your plan? Is it reasonable?
I can't.
Control your rage; give me his gage. Lions can tame leopards after all.
And then an "I" comes last.
Madam, your advice is full of wisdom and caring.
Noble Montano, you are usually civil. You are famous for the discipline and restraint you show in your youth. Even those who are fond of criticizing can't help but praise you. What's the matter? What has caused you to throw away your reputation and trade in your good name for that of a night-brawler? Tell me.
[To himself] He's figured out the riddle, which means I'll have to kill him. He can't survive another day to ruin my reputation, or to tell the world the hateful sin I've committed. The prince must die instantly for my honor's sake.[To an unknown person] Who's there?
Tell her, Emilia. I'll use my gift of speech. If I can be as articulate as I am bold, then I'll do well.
What's the difference?
I did.
Almost ten o'clock.
I beg you, forgive me; I cant show you.
Gregory, I swear we wont put up with their crap.
Oh, curses upon you, you slandering women!
The longest journey will have the longest moans of grief.
But you've seen Desdemona and Cassio together.
Oh, Publius, youre wrong. One is Murder, and the others name is Rape. So put them in chains, gentle Publius; restrain them, Caius and Valentine. Youve often heard me wish for this moment, and now its here, so make sure theyre bound tightly. Gag them if they start to cry out.
No, that's not like you to obey a woman.
Good lords, escort him to his regiment. I'll wrestle with my troubled thoughts and try to take a nap, so that sleepiness won't weigh me down tomorrow and keep me from flying on the wings of victory. Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
I am bleeding, but I haven't been killed, sir.
[To QUEEN MARGARET] Good advice, by God.
Have you forgotten who I am?
You have retrieved information at great cost. Does he have as many troops as you say?
Sir, I have to believe you. I do. I'll take Bohemia out as long as, once he's gone, you'll take the queen back immediately for your son's sake and to stop any potential gossip from spreading to our allies' courts and countries at large.
As long as I remember her, I can't forget my mistakes. I still think about how badly I messed up, leaving my kingdom without a prince and myself without a wife.
Please, stop pushing me. There is no one in the whole world better at convincing me to do things than you. And now, if you really needed me, you would have almost won me overexcept that I'd still have to say "no." Duty calls and I have to go home. If you keep me here, you'll only be hurting me in the long run; if I stay, I'll only be a burden to your hospitality. So if I leave, it's a win-win! Goodbye, brother.
Catesby, look out over the walls for us.
[Offstage] A sail, a sail!
My lord, it's only just begun.
Why, how could she have been murdered?
I'll never change my mind, Iago. Just like how the Black Sea never ebbs back but keeps flowing on with its icy waters through the Propontic sea and onward to the Hellespont, so my bloody thoughts only move forward with a violent current and never look back. My anger is like a tide and if it ever recedes back to love it is swallowed up again by a huge wave of revenge. Now, by heaven, with all the reverence of a sacred oath, I here make a vow. [He kneels down]
Youll make him angry if he hears you.
Well, that's what they say, but I think life consists of eating and drinking.
Ha! You are still proud?
How are you, my nephew, noble Lord of York?
What?
Greetings, great master! Noble sir, greetings! Ive come to do whatever you would like, whether its to fly, swim, jump into fire, or ride upon the clouds. Whatever you want done, ask Ariel and all his many skills, to do it.
Ill show you the best sources of fresh water. Ill pick berries for you. Ill fish for you and gather enough firewood for you. May the tyrant Im serving now die of the plague! I wont carry any more wood for him. Instead, Ill serve you now, you miraculous man.
If it please you to help us, sir, please take this money. I can give more afterwardas much as you likeand you can keep this young man as collateral until I do.
You knew he was planning to leave, and you very well know what you've been working on in his absence.
I think the King of Sicily is planning to visit the King of Bohemia this coming summer (as he should).
Madam, only my case from before. I beg you to use your virtuous powers to help me return to the good graces of Othello, whom I honor with all of my heart. I want this to happen quickly. If my offense was so bad that neither my past service nor my present regret, nor the future good deeds I promise can buy back his love, then I at least would like to know this now. If that is the case then I will pretend to be content, and settle on a new career to try my fortunes there.
All hail Lucius, Rome's royal emperor!
In truth, I think you wouldn't do it.
It must be something government-relatedeither having to do with Venice or some secret thing that's now come to light in Cyprusthat has put him in this mood. When this happens, men take out their tempers on less important things, when they're really upset with bigger issues. That's what happens when we hurt our finger, and it makes other parts of our bodies seem to hurt. No, we shouldn't idolize men, or expect them to always be as nice as they are on their wedding day. Oh, Emilia, curse me: I'm so foolish that I thought Othello was being unkind, but I was clearly falsely accusing him.
Release him, Fabian, and bring him here.
Didn't you wake up during all this agony?
Madam, he's well and in good health.
God bless your Grace! We will bear witness to the fact that you didn't want the crown.
It's a cold world, Curtis, for every man except fire-starters like you, so start a fire! Do your duty, and take your reward, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
I am a messenger.
[As CAMBIO] All but the bass string.
Are these your agents? What are their names?
I thought you were willing to resign.
Then you would have an excellent head of hair.
Then let me lock the door, so that no one can come in until I've explained myself.
You'll find the truth to be otherwise, I assure you. So if you value your life at all, be on your guard, for your opponent has all the youth, strength, skill, and anger that God can give to a man.
Yes, my lord. [Seeing the chest] Even more jewels! There is no opposing him when he is in this mood!
You are boththe cause and the dreadful effect.
[To himself] Why did I marry? Without a doubt, this honest man has seen more than he lets on, and knows moremuch morethan he is telling me.
It was more by good luck, ma'am, than by skill.
But you've reaped all the benefits from her suffering. I was too eager in helping Edward to the throne, and now he seems to have forgotten my deeds. Well, as for Clarence, he is being well repaid for his painsshut in a pigsty to be fattened up and slaughtered. May God pardon those responsible.
Villain, I say, knock for me on this door, and pound it well, or I'll knock your fool's head!
My son, I won't be having any more children, but your sons and daughters will all be born gentlemen and women.
The Duke of Buckingham and I are just coming now from a visit to his Majesty.
May sleep shut your eyes,
and may you feel peace in your heart.
Amen, I wholeheartedly agree.
If it would please you. But I would rather kill two enemies.
Yes, he's in heaven, where you will never go.
I'm sorry that my noble cousin should suspect that I wish him harm. By heaven, we are here because we love him. Go back and tell him.
Richmond is on the seas.
I am surethat we should let him live.
Look, and youll see.
God in heaven bless her! Youre wrong, my lord, to shout at her that way.
Oh ho, ask her! Well, then she has to come.
You've tricked my daughter into loving you, you crook.
God bless you, Mr Priest.
On pain of death, no one should be so bold as to touch the king's lists except the marshal and the officers in charge.
You didand even more than that, Miranda. But how is it possible that you can remember all this? What else do you remember through the darkness and abyss of passing time? If you remember something about your life before you came here, you may also remember how you arrived here.
For God's sake! Why are you smiling like that, and kissing your hand so often?
Which of you is the honorable lady of the house?
I see, sir, that passion is eating away at you. I regret that I told you about this. You say that you wish you could be satisfied?
Help, grandfather, help! My aunt Lavinia follows me everywhere, but I dont know why. Uncle Marcus, see how quickly she comes after me. Oh, sweet aunt, I dont know what you mean.
Ill stand here until you remember.
Here he is, here he is. How are you, sir? How are you feeling, man?
That one's worse.
[To attendants] Give us some privacy for a while. [To VIOLA] Cesario, you know everything about me. I have opened the book of my most secret soul to you. Therefore, good youth, direct your steps to Olivia's house. Don't let them deny you accessstand outside her door and tell them that you'll plant roots there until they let you see her.
What, you don't think you can break her to the lute?
I expect something better.
Its time that I told you everything. Give me a hand and take this magic cloak off of me.
Rushed to!?
But there is, there is.
Neighbors and friends, though the seats for the bride and bridegroom will be empty at the table, you know there are no delicacies lacking at the feast itself.
Let her hang me then. A well-hanged (and well-hung) man doesn't need to be afraid of anything he sees.
If we allowed ourselves to think about, or entertain, every sad thing that happens, then the entertainer will end up with
Who's with him?
No, truly, I don't know. But I do know that to be up late is to be up late.
Petruchio, let's go on. You've won the war.
Thats obvious.
Right on time. Good day, Titus and Hortensius.
You're right; they're a mess, truth be told. The poor Transylvanian girl is deadthe one that slept with that guy with the tiny junk.
Look around the wicked streets of Rome, and when you find a man that looks like you, good Murder, stab him, for hes a murderer. Go with him, good Rape, and when you find someone who looks like you, stab him, for hes a rapist.[To TAMORA] Go with them, and in the emperors court theres a queen served by a Mooryoull recognize her, since she looks exactly like you. I beg you, give them both a violent death, for theyve been violent to me and my family.
Oh, wheres Romeo? Have you seen him at all today? Im happy he wasnt around for this fight.
But surely you won't marry her like this.
Who tricked you? Who has done you wrong?
Too bad it fell so flat.
Please, sir, a coin for me?
Grumio, get my horses ready.
We are not going to be prepared for this wedding celebration.
Who rules here?
Will you set sail and leave now, sir? Here's the door.
What, like a dead body?
You see this man who just left, Cassio? He is such a good soldier he could be a commander in and help lead Caesar's army. But his vice is equal to his virtue. It's too bad. I worry, though, that the trust Othello puts in him will cause a lot of trouble on this island at some point when Cassio is drunk.
I hope you are not bitter that I could not lend you money.
In truth, tonight he's boarded a ship carrying lots of treasure. And if his prize turns out to be legal, he'll be well-off forever.
I should think so. If I were Hermione's ghost, I'd make you look your new wife in the eye. I'd ask you to tell me why you chose her. Then I'd shriek loud enough to burst your eardrums, and say, "Remember me."
This sorrow is the result of recklessness. Didn't you notice how the queen's guilty relatives turned pale when they heard about Clarence's death? Oh, they were always urging the king to do it. God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you come with me to comfort Edward with our companionship?
You're playing to his weakness.
For shame, for shame! Don't furrow your brow and glare so scornfully to try to wound the man who is your lord, your king, and your governor. It tarnishes your beauty like frost blights the meadows, and ruins your reputation like a strong wind shaking a flower bud. In no sense whatsoever is it appropriate or pleasant. An angry woman is like a stirred-up fountainmuddy, ugly, thick, lacking beautyand while it's in this condition, no one, not even a dry or thirsty man, will stoop to sip or touch one drop of it. Your husband is your lord, your life, your keeper, your head, your ruler, and one who cares for you. To keep you safe and comfortable he commits his body to painful labor on both sea and land, to staying awake on stormy nights and cold days at sea, while you stay at home, warm and secure. And in exchange all he asks for is love, beauty, and true obediencetoo little payment for so great a debt. A woman owes her husband the same obedience that a subject owes to his prince. And when she is stubborn, peevish, sullen, sour, and not obedient to his honest will, then what is she but a foul, vicious rebel, and a cursed traitor to her loving lord? I am ashamed that women are so foolish as to declare war when they should kneel and plead for peace. I'm ashamed that they should seek rulership, supremacy, and power when they are obligated to serve, love and obey. Why else are our bodies so soft and weak and smooth, unfit for labor and trouble in the world, if not so that our soft qualities and our hearts should agree with our external parts? Come, come, you weak, willful worms! My mind was once just as arrogant as yours, my courage just as great, and my wit perhaps even better when it came to tossing words back and forth and exchanging frowns for frowns. But now I see that our swords are only straws, our strength is just as weak, and our weakness is beyond compare, so that we seem to be exactly the thing we are not. So humble your pride, for it's useless. Place your hands beneath your husband's boot as a gesture of obedience. My hand is always ready to comfort and pleasure my husband, if he wants me to.
In order to generously give it to you again. But Im wishing for something I have already. My generosity to you is as endless as the sea, my love as deep as the sea. The more love I give you, the more I have. Both are infinite.
We'll bring the bear back just to make him angry then, and we'll make a fool of him until he's ruined. Won't we, Sir Andrew?
That was definitely "grace," wasn't it? Well, look at that, I've said the right thing two whole times. The first time, I earned a royal husband forever; the second time, I earned a friend for a while.
Well, my child, early Thursday morning, at Saint Peters Church, the gallant, young, and noble gentleman Count Paris will make you a joyful bride.
Alas for both Edward and Clarence, both mine!
[To herself] Why is my father speaking to him so rudely? This is the third man that Ive ever seen in my life, and the first one for whom Ive ever felt such feelings that made me sigh. I hope my father is compassionate enough to me that he wants for me what I want for myself!
Or because she was naked in bed with a friend for just an hour or more, not meaning any harm?
[Pointing to PERICLES] But wait: that knight looks sad, like our party isn't good enough for him. Haven't you noticed, Thaisa?
Well then, slave, go!
I humbly leave you.
Please don't believe the jealous lies of her slanderers. And even if there's some truth to the rumors, then forgive her, for I think she only acts that way because she's sicknot because she hates you.
Oh, you are certainly wise!
What do you mean, "really?" Yes, really. You think something's strange about that? Isn't Cassio honest?
[To BAPTISTA] Please, sir, is it your intention to make a laughingstock of me in front of these mates?
I'm off.
A delicate odor.
What would you like?
Go take this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.
Only God knows why, but the queen your mother and your brother York have taken sanctuary in Westminster Abbey. The tender prince wanted to come with me to meet your Grace, but his mother forced him to stay.
Four in the morning.
How are you, noble uncle Lancaster?
I don't know of any kind thing you've done, and I don't know your voice or your face. I hate an ungrateful man more than I hate lying, vanity, babbling, drunkenness, or any other sin that corrupts our frail human blood
Is that true?
She says you, your Worship, intend to make a plaything out of her.
I believe you, and I ask for your forgiveness. Will you please ask that half-devil why he has tricked me and ruined my soul and body?
[To herself]  Now, by the gods, there's nothing that would make me happier.
Ah, I can see you're serious, but I can't take your clothes in good conscience.
Come now, youre being silly. Leave me and do what I told you to do. Do you really not have a letter for me from the friar?
May heaven keep that monster away from Othello's mind!
[Noticing AUTOLYCUS] Who have we here? [To FLORIZEL and PERDITA] We'll make use of this; we can't overlook anything that might help us.
Who is my boss?
Welcome, Harry: what, won't this castle surrender?
Strike!
Ha, ha, ha!
To whom?
The Turkish forces are heading for Rhodes. Sir Angelo ordered me to bring this news here to the city government.
Gentlewoman, my lady calls for you.
That's what I want to learn from you, since you know her temperament best.
Give me my boots, I tell you; saddle my horse. Now, by my honor, by my life, and by my word, I'll turn in the villain.
I can't linger. I once knew a girl who was married in the afternoon as she went out to the garden to look for parsley to stuff a rabbit. It may happen to you too, sir. And so farewell, sir. My master instructed me to go to Saint Luke's and tell the priest to be ready in anticipation of your arrival with your better half.
Of all places, I don't like the Tower at all. Didn't Julius Caesar build it, my lord?
Please, don't talk anymore about this. Let Cassio come when he wants. I won't deny you what you want.
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back! That horse used to eat bread from my royal hand; he was proud when I touched him. Why didn't he stumble? Why didn't he fall downsince pride must have a fallso that Bolingbroke would fall break his neck? But I forgive you, horse! Why am I angry at you, since you were born to carry men on your back? I was not born a horse, but I bear a burden like a donkey, spurred on and exhausted by Bolingbroke.
After I have done what I promised?
That's from worries and cares.
Very good!
Or should I?
Don't worry, sir. You provided corn for my country when we were starving. My people still pray for you, and we'll take care of your child, too. If I neglected my duty, the common people (whom you saved) would force me to do my duty. But if I need any punishment, may the gods take revenge on me and my descendants of the next generation!
I'll make him the offer. Stand here and put on a brave face. We'll end this without anyone dying. [To himself] And I'll ride your horse just like I ride you.
Stand even farther away, Trinculo.[To CALIBAN] All right, continue.
God bless you, sir.
Be strong, then. Go home, be cheerful, and agree to marry Paris. Tomorrow is Wednesday. Tomorrow night make sure that you go to sleep alone. Dont let the Nurse sleep in your bedroom. [Showing her a vial] Drink this liquor when youre in bed. A cold, sleepy feeling will then run through your veins, and your pulse will cease. Your body will go cold, and youll stop breathing. The red of your lips and cheeks will fade to a pale ashen color, and your eyelids will close just as if you were dead. Your body will lose control over its own movement, and will become stiff as that of a corpse. Youll remain in this simulation of death for forty-two hours, and then youll wake as if from a pleasant sleep. So when the bridegroom comes to wake you from your bed in the morning, he will think that you are dead. Then, as is the tradition of our city, youll be dressed in your best clothes and placed on an uncovered funeral bier, and carried to the Capulet tomb that holds all of your dead relatives. Meanwhile, before you wake up, Ill send word to Romeo of our plan. Hell come here, and well keep a watch over you as you wake. That night, Romeo will take you with him to Mantua. So, as long as you dont change your mind or let your womanly fear interfere with your courage, youll be free from the current situation which threatens to force you into sin.
[As CAMBIO] Whatever I teach her, I'll plead your case. You can be sure of thatI'll argue for you as strongly as if you were there yourself. And maybe I'll be more successful than you would be too, sir, unless you were a scholar.
Come on, come on. Where is your boar-hunting spear, man? You're afraid of the boar, but you'll go around unarmed?
Master, I've paid through the nose for this one. If you like her, good. If not, I've lost my bet.
I wish my mouth were a bat to beat you with. That way, I could answer your question correctly.
Enough of this. Please, be quiet.
The Earl of Wiltshire uses the realm like a farm.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby, stands here for God, his sovereign and himself, to prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, a traitor to his God, his king and him, and if not to prove himself a false liar: he challenges Mowbray to fight.
What do you think?
Kind sister-in-law, thanks. We'll all go together.
Boy! Come on, boy! What's the matter? Look up and speak.
Julia?! Is that you?
Yeah. My lord is asking for three thousand crowns. What about yours?
Hey! Who's inside?
Making a fool out of that man would be as virtuous a deed as giving wine to the thirsty. I could challenge him to a duel and then not show upthat might work.
[Reading] "You'll be killing me like a criminal and a villain."
No, I don't hear your honest friend. I hear you.
I'll wait for her here and woo her forcefully when she comes. If she rants and scolds, I'll tell her that she sings as sweetly as a nightingale. If she frowns, I'll say that she looks as cheerful as morning roses newly washed with dew. If she is silent and won't say a word, then I'll praise her for being talkative, and say that she speaks with piercing eloquence. If she tells me to get out, then I'll thank her as if she'd asked me to stay with her for a week. If she refuses to marry me, then I'll ask about the date for the announcement and the wedding. But here she comesand now, Petruchio, speak.
Why, you've sent Malvolio into such a fantasy that he'll go mad when he learns the truth.
Well, it means peace, and love, and a quiet life, and authority commanding respect, and proper hierarchy, and, in brief, everything sweet and happy.
But Camillo, what reason for visiting can I make up?
Now, my lord, what will we do if Lord Hastings won't go along with our conspiracy?
Nothing? It's the music of the spheres! Listen, my Marina.
Fury, Fury! Over there, Tyrant, there. Look, look!
Do accept, my lord. Your citizens beg you.
God help us! I see the ruin of my family. The tiger has now seized the gentle deer. Brute tyranny begins to attack the innocent, weak throne. Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre! I can see how this will end as clearly as if I was reading it on a map.
Thank you, my noble lord. Now would you be willing to listen once again to the request I made to you before?
[As CAMBIO] Start over, man, and tune again.
Master, master! I have news, old news, and such news as you never heard before!
Break the seal and read it.
What has happened to cause everyone to start shrieking?
I always thought you were an able and efficient guy whoto give you your due creditknows how to be reasonable. I always imagined that instead of being swept up in circumstance you'd be able to see an opportunity when it presented itself. These are good traits.
If I were one of your sheep, I wouldn't need to graze on grassI could live just by gazing at your beautiful face.
I know you as well, more than I'd like to know. Go follow your drum and paint the ground with the red, red, red blood of men. Religious and civil laws are cruelwhy shouldn't war be cruel too?
We represent the law. He will die, and stop pushing the point. Though it does not please us, he will die for murder, even if he is your friend or family.
[To STEPHANO] Look, look, hes mocking me again! Please, bite him to death.
You won't do it for anything in the world, I hope. You're handsome; I can tell by your looks that you have a gentle heart. I saw you recently when you got hurt breaking up a fight, and really, it said a lot about your character. Do the right thing now! Your lady wants me dead; don't do it. Save poor me, the weaker one.
I mean someone with the same name, but a better personality.
How have you become so out of your mind, Michael?
I had thought, my lord, that I might hear about him from you.
Noble Mercutio, put your sword away.
Ha ha! I laugh when I imagine that baby as a bastard!
But
When the sun sets the air drizzles dew. But when the son of my brother died, the rain came in a downpour.
I'm leaving tomorrow, sir. I'm worried about what might have happened in Bohemia while I've been goneunfavorable winds may be blowing, if you know what I mean. Besides, I've over-stayed my welcome here and I've worn you out.
Youre foolishly spurring on, I see! As long as I live, if I meet Surrey Ill spit on him, while I say he lies, and lies, and lies: I promise to have my revenge. By my immortal soul, Aumerle is guilty of what I accuse him of; besides, I heard the banished Norfolk say that you, Aumerle, sent two of your servants to execute the noble duke at Calais.
Speak up, Othello. Did you subdue and poison this young girl by trickery and force? Or did the marriage come about voluntarily, as two souls are accustomed to come together?
I'm a poor man, sir.
I'll get my revenge on the whole pack of you.
I forgot you were out there. Come in, Emilia. Quietly, now. Let me draw the bed curtains. Where are you?
And shall I have what I ask?
Trinculo, if you dont have anything nice to say, dont say anything at all. And if you dont listen to me, Ill hang you from the next tree. This poor monster is my loyal subject, and I refuse to let him be insulted.
Put your virtue away just this once, sir, and let your human weakness take my advice.
Ive lost all my patience.
I didn't call you.
I have another weapon in this room. It is a sword from Spain, hardened in an icy stream. Oh, here it is. Uncle, I must come out of the room.
Pardon me, my gentle master. I agree with everything you've said, and I'm glad that you've followed through with your decision to enjoy all the pleasures of sweet philosophy. Only, good master, while we're studying all this admirable virtue and moral discipline, let's not become stoics or stocks, and let's not focus on Aristotle's restraints so much that we forget to read Ovid. Practice your logic with the friends you have, and use rhetoric in everyday talk. Stimulate yourself with music and poetry. And as for mathematics and metaphysicsfollow your appetite, and only study what you can stomach. You'll gain no profit from something you take no pleasure in. In short, sir, study what you enjoy.
Have courage, sir! God bless you!
You mean "Shut your mouth, you villain," right? If we sing that then I'll have to call you a villain, knight.
We're speaking for your sake, not ours. You've clearly been manipulated by some crook, and we'll punish him for it. I wish I knew the guy; I would ruin his life. If Hermione's corrupt . . . I have three daughters. The oldest is eleven, the younger two are nine and five. If this turns out to be true, they'll pay for it. I swear I'll neuter all of them. They'll never hit puberty and they'll never give birth to their own bastard children. Keep in mind, they're supposed to inherit my money and everything equally. I'd rather castrate myself than see them unable to have their own families.
If you love me, stay.
May God thank you for it! But now, please, sir: a question keeps popping up in my mind. Why did you create this storm at sea?
[As LITIO] Madam, before you touch the instrument or learn the fingering, I must begin by teaching you the fundamentals of music. To teach you the scales, I have a method that's more pleasant and effective than what any other teachers use. And here it is written out.
My lord.
So come back with us to Athens, a city yours as well as ours, to become a captain. You will be met with thanks and allowed absolute power and authority to your name. Soon enough we will drive back Alcibiades and his wild attacks. He is like a savage boar, rooting up the peace in his own country.
Just as sane as me? You must be crazy then, if you're no saner than a fool.
There's something in the climate here.
Yes, noble nephew. That is, if it's light enough for you to hold.
The shepherd saw them wreck at the same instant that Antigonus died, so everything that brought the child to them disappeared at the moment she was found. But poor Paulinashe was torn between joy and grief! She was crying for her husband, but rejoicing that the oracle was fulfilled. She kept hugging the princess, as if she would hold her to her heart forever so that she'd never be lost again.
[To TYBALT] Get on with it, sir. Attack.
What good is there still undiscovered in this world that can do me good now?
Remember your promise: you've sworn to do it. It's just a little thing which no one will ever find out about. And you can count on being rewarded. Don't let your icy conscience thaw out with the heat of love. And don't let pity, which even women have nothing to do with, get the best of youdo just what I've told you to do.
Villain, I know how to protect myself.
By God, Sir Toby, you must come home earlier at night. Your niece, my lady, strongly disapproves of the late hours you keep.
I have enough courage; I've never been afraid in my life (to my own injury). But for this baby's sake, this brand-new sailor, I wish the storm would quiet down.
If they have power over us, we'll be condemned too, because we've been always  near the king.
Who is this? My granddaughter Plantagenet, led by the hand of her kind aunt, the Duchess of Gloucester? Now, I swear, she's heading to the Tower to greet the young prince, whom she loves so purely.
[To HORTENSIO] Please, sir, let him go while this mood lasts. I swear, if she knew him as well as I do, she'd know how little scolding affects him. At best, she might come up with ten or so horrible names to call him. Why, that's nothing. Once he gets started, he'll rant and rave and throw his rope tricks around, and if she tries to stand up to him, he'll throw a figure of speech in her face that'll disfigure her so she'll have no more eyes to see with than a cat does. You don't know him, sir.
[To herself] If hes married, Id rather die than marry someone else.
Calm down, gentlemen. I will settle this quarrel. Only deeds can determine the winner here. Whoever can offer my daughter the most wealth and property as her widow's inheritance will have Bianca's love. So tell me, Sir Gremio, what can you offer her?
Oh, you now! We're all done in here. Here's the money I owe you for it. Please now, keep this little rendezvous a secret.
No, my lord, I'm not.
Your actions won't be forgotten, Fitzwater; I know that you deserve rewards.
[Whispering] I knew it was me, for I've often been called foolish.
Oh, thank you, sircarefully, ow! [AUTOLYCUS winces in pain]
I will admit it does represent nature well. The purpose of artlies in these touches. They're almost livelier than life itself.
You madman, you're wrong. I say that there's no darkness but ignorance, and you're more ignorant than the Egyptians during Moses' plague of fog.
Its time for my dinner. This island is mine, given to me by my mother Sycorax. You took it from me. When you first came here, you petted me and treated me well. You would give me water with berries in it, and you taught me the names for the sun burning in the daytime sky and the moon which lights the night. I loved you then, and I showed you all the features of the islandthe freshwater springs, the saltwater pits, the places that were good for growing things and those that were not. A curse on me for doing all that! May all the evil spells of Sycorax torment you with toads, beetles, and bats! Im the only subject you have on this island, where once I was my own king. And now you keep me confined in this cave and dont let me go anywhere else on the island.
Look! Here comes Apemantus with the fool. Let's make fun of them.
Iago, if you think that a friend of yours is in trouble but you don't say anything, then you are wronging your friend.
What, you foul villain, did you never see your master's father, Vincentio?
Thanks. I was on the shore, admiring Neptune's domain, when I saw your impressive ship sail toward us. I came out in my ship to find out where you've come from.
Oh, then describe the passion of my love for her. Ambush her with descriptions of my faithfulness. It will be best if you act out my feelingsshe'll pay closer attention to you, as a young man, than to an older, more serious messenger.
That was excellent, truly.
I'd rather ask him to hate me than ask him to have a commander who is as feeble, drunk, and indiscreet as I am. I got drunk, and spoke nonsense, and squabbled, swaggered, and swore. I practically ranted at my own shadow. Oh, wine, you invisible spiritif you don't have a name, then I will call you devil!
You're telling me to do exactly what I had already decided to do myself. I won't ruin Hermione's reputation, not at all.
Romeo!
Go see my assistant.
And she's pretty, too, right?
You will pay for this, Roderigo. I know what kind of man you are.
You have pleasured us greatly, fair ladies, and set a wonderful mood for our feast, which before was not half so beautiful and kind. You have added value and brilliance to the event and entertained me in my own home. Thank you.
No, I swear on my honor as a man!
He began it, my gracious lord. And since then succeeding generations have added on to it.
From Mantua.
We're sad to leave, but we'll go now.
Come on, that's enough. It's useless to make speeches.
I wish Bagot had a higher rankexcept yours, of courseso that he'd be worth fighting.
Heres what I think. Romeos banished. Theres no chance that he would ever come back to challenge you if you get married. And if he does come back, he can only do so by sneaking in. Since thats the way things are, I think the best thing for you to do is to marry the count. Hes a lovely gentleman! Romeos a dishcloth compared to him. An eagle does not have eyes as green, quick, or beautiful as Paris does. Curse my heart, but I think youre lucky to have this second husband, because he surpasses your first. And even if he didnt, your first husband is dead, or as good as dead, since Romeo doesnt live here and you dont get to enjoy him.
Yes, and I've said just what I intend to do.
hispering] Oh quiet, quiet!
Are you a clergyman?
[To himself] What a beautiful encounter between two people so utterly in love! May heaven shower blessings on the love growing between them!
Well, on my own head be it, and thats it. Say goodbye; you have to go now.
What money, sir? I'll lend you what I can to thank you for the kindness you've shown me here, and because I pity your current troubles, but I don't have much. I'll divide my money with you. Here is half of all that I have. [Offering him money]
[As LUCENTIO] If that's true, sir, and you are the man who will help us allmyself includedand you do break the ice and perform the incredible feat of winning the elder sister, thereby setting the younger free for us to woothen I'm sure whoever happens to win her won't be such a brute as to be ungrateful to you.
I'll follow you to the deepest gates of Hell, you witty devil!
I'll do exactly as you say. This makes a lot of sense.
Oh, yes he knew her, and often carried messages between Desdemona and me.
He has ribbons of every color in the rainbow, more pens than anyone could ever use in a lifetime, ink, and all kinds of fabrics (and he absolutely raves about the workmanship of the weavers).
[As LITIO, to LUCENTIO] You can go take a walk, and leave us alone for a while. I don't teach music for three people.
Is love really so tender? To me it seems too rough, too rude, too unruly, and it pricks like a thorn.
It's dinnertime, my lord. It's nine o'clock.
No, madam, he does nothing but smile. It would be best if you had a guard nearby if he comes here, for the man is surely sick in his head.
Twelve years ago, Miranda, twelve years ago, your father was the Duke of Milan, a prince with great power.
Stop! The king has thrown down his warder.
Women will love her for being more worth their love than men. Men will love her because she's the most special woman that ever was.
Strange sounds! Can't you hear?
Please dont swear by the moon, the unreliable moon, which changes its position in the sky each month. I do not want your love to end up being similarly variable.
And I believe it with my soul.
Its as false, by heaven, as heaven is true.
I know you are. Sweet Revenge, goodbye.
Listen! I hear their drums. Fight, gentlemen of England! Fight, bold citizens! Draw, archersdraw your bows all the way back! Horsemen, spur your proud horses hard, and ride with violence, to violence! Break your lances against the enemy and amaze even the heavens!
Bring the men out. Bushy and Green, I won't bother with your soulssince they'll be parted from your body soon anywayby telling you what an evil life you've led, since that will be no help. But to justify myself,  I will publicly explain some reasons why you must die. You have misled a prince, a royal kinga gentleman happy in his ancestry, disfigured, and made unhappy by you. Your sinfulness has caused a divorce between his queen and him, since he spent his time away from the marriage bed, amusing himself with you. You have stained the queen's cheeks with tears from your awful wrongs. I was myself a prince, near to the king in fortune and blood, until you made him misinterpret me, and have stooped my neck under your crimes, sighing my English breath in foreign lands and eating the bitter bread of banishment. Meanwhile, you have used my seal for your own gain, ruined my land and cut down my trees, and destroyed my coat of arms in my own windowsleaving me no sign, except men's opinions and my living blood, to show the world I am a gentleman. This and much more, much more than twice all this, condemns you to die. [To Northumberland] See them delivered over to execution and the hand of death.
Well, as I told you, its his habit to take a nap in the afternoon. Thats when you can smash in his skull, after youve first stolen his books. Or you could hit him on the head with a log. Or stab him in the belly with a spear. Or cut his throat with a knife. But remember to steal his books first, because without them, hes just a fool like me, and wont be able to command even one spirit. The other spirits all hate him as completely as I do. Burn everything but his magic books. He has some magnificent furniture and furnishingsat least thats how he describes themthat he plans to use to furnish his house once he gets one. The thing you should focus on though is the beauty of his daughter. Prospero himself says she has no equal. I never saw a woman other than my mother, Sycorax. Miranda is so much more beautiful than Sycorax that its like comparing the most beautiful thing to the least.
May all the blessings of a happy father surround you. Stand up, and tell me how you ended up here.
Will you listen to me, Roderigo?
If it turns out otherwise, I'll make my wife sleep in the stable. I'll rig her to my carriage and won't trust her any farther than I can throw her. I mean, if Hermione's a cheater, then every atom of every woman in the world is, too.
As long as hell and Richard decide.
I've noticed, too, Camilloso much so that I have people watching him for me wherever he goes. They've reported that he's spending most of his time at a poor shepherd's house. They tell me that some time ago the shepherd suddenly went from rags to riches, to the complete shock of his neighbors.
Really? Can you stand? [He leans over to take a closer look at AUTOLYCUS's shoulder]
And you urged me to bury my love.
I assure you, I wish none of this was happening.
Now, if I'd considered something I once heard about him, I could have scoffed at my uncleand mocked his growth more than he mocked mine.
Good thinking. I have it on me here. [He gives them a paper] When you're done, go to Crosby Place. But, sirs, be quick in your execution. And don't let him plead for his life, for Clarence is well-spoken, and he may convince you to spare him if you listen too closely to his words.
I cannot accept that answer.
[To the Mytilene Sailor] Where is Lord Helicanus? He can answer your questions. Oh, here he is. [To HELICANUS] Sir, there's a boat that just came from Mytilene and Lysimachus, the governor, is in it, asking to come onboard. What should we do?
The woman has fallen down! He's surely killed his own wife.
Leave us alone.
Then I don't feel bad for saying it.
Then I will not kiss you, so as not to dirty your mouth too.
Yes, and a kind one at that. Pray to God, sir, that your wife doesn't send you a worse one.
Give me my sword, I said! Old Montague has arrived, and hes waving his sword just to spite me.
Well, she's a foolish girl for fleeing from a good courtship when it follows her. I'll go after hernot so much because I love the uncaring Silvia, but more because I want to take revenge on Eglamour.
Oh, I beg your pardon. Youre the singer. Ill answer for you. It is music with her silver sound, because musicians will never get rich.[Singing]Then music with her silver soundQuickly makes you feel all right.
Ma'am, you're so obviously good and virtuous that I can't imagine you not succeeding. There's no better woman for this job. I'll go into the next room and tell the queen your plan. Though she only gave birth today, she's afraid to ask them to take the baby out of this prison. If they deny her request, who knowsthey might kill the child.
Why, he won't be waking up until Judgment Day.
How can all this be accomplished? Can you bring me to him?
Wretched boy, you hung out with him here on earth, and now youre going to go with him to heaven.
I'll give you a hug. Give me my clothes. I'm overwhelmed with what I've seen. May the heavens bless my girl! But listen: what's that music? Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him the whole thing, point by point, because he still seems unsuretell him that you're my daughter. But what's that music?
Speak well of me to her.
Madam wife, they say that I've been dreaming or asleep for fifteen years or more.
Lucius, save the child, and bring it to the empress from me. If you do this, I'll show you marvelous things that will be to your advantage to hear. If you don't, whatever happens, I'll say nothing more but "revenge rot you all!"
Good night, madam. I humbly thank you, my lady.
Good.
Oh, here comes my Nurse, bringing news. Every voice that speaks Romeos name speaks with heavenly beauty. Now, Nurse, whats your news? What is that you have there? The rope ladder Romeo told you to get?
Debts! Where are you from?
Come here, the food is ready!
Silly, gloomy cousin! Don't you know that when the sun is down, thieves and robbers roam about unseen, boldly committing murders and other crimes; but when the the sun appears again in the east, he sets the tops of trees on fire and shines a light in every dark placethen, murders, treason, and other detestable sins will show themselves for what they are, the cloak of night plucked from their backs. So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbrokewho has enjoyed the night while the we, the sun, were wandering down belowshall see us rising in our throne, the east, his treason will not survive the light of day, and even he will tremble at his sin. Not all the water in the rough rude sea can wash the balm off from an anointed king; no word from an ordinary, earthly man can depose the deputy elected by the Lord. For every man that Bolingbroke has in his army, God has a glorious angel to fight for Richard; and if angels fight, weak men must be defeated, for heaven still defends the what is right.
She has a good face, speaks well, and has really nice clothes. There's nothing about her that would make you dislike her.
[As LUCENTIO] Why, then she's mine alone, of all the men in the world, by your firm promise. Gremio has been outbid.
[As LUCENTIO] Don't worry about him.Biondello, boy, now play your part well. Imagine this is the real Vincentio.
Oh, you once did prophesy that the time would come when I would want your help in cursing that swollen spider, that foul hunchbacked toad!
Oh, I am unhappy!
You're mistaken, knight. "Accost her" isn't her nameI meant that you should face her, greet her, woo her, and conquer her.
Isn't that comforting? [To the SHEPHERD] We need to see the king and show him our secret stuff. He needs to know that she's neither your daughter nor my sister, otherwise we're dead. [To AUTOLYCUS] Sir, I'll give you as much money as this old man did after the business is done. And you can hold on to me as collateral in the meantime.
Yes, he was the one who told me about her first. He is an honest man, and hates the slime of filthy bad deeds.
Swear that he will, and then I'll talk.
Long live Gonzalo!
I dont doubt it. When were older these difficulties will just be stories that we tell each other.
[As LUCENTIO] Then you'd better say that I'm not really Lucentio.
His judgment was gentler than that. You wont be executed, but will be banished from Verona.
Nothing evil could ever exist in a body this attractive. If the devil had a house as beautiful as his body, then good things would fight to live in it.
Goodbye.
Now Ill go and take revenge for you, bringing my agents with me.
You'll kiss me too hard and talk to me like I'm still a baby. [To SECOND LADY] I love you better.
His Grace Richard looks so cheerful and calm this morning. He has some idea or plan that he's pleased about whenever he says "good morning" with such spirit. I don't think there's a man in all the Christian kingdoms who's worse at hiding his love or hate than Richard is. You can know his heart from looking at his face.
[Reciting a poem to himself] "When we write poetry praising bad things for money, it ruins the better verse that rightly supports good things."
A good laugh.
An honest tale works best when it's told plainly.
The two of us, my lord, will guard you while you rest and make sure that you're safe.
Go see what that trumpet's for, boy.
Oh, musicians, because my heart itself is playing My Heart is Full of Woe. Oh, play me some happy mournful tune to comfort me.
But listen! What is that noise?
I thank you for that taunt, good Tranio.
This guy has some serious guts.
Do pardon her, good old grandfather, and also tell us which way you're traveling. If you're going the same way we are, we'd be glad to have your company.
My dagger, little Nephew? With all my heart.
Hey, missy, aren't you getting a little hasty?[To himself] I'm happy about this, with all my heart. [To PERICLES and THAISA] You'll have to listen to me; I'll make you do what I want. Would you really agree to marry a stranger without my permission? He could be anybody, we don't even know if he's a prince. So, listen, missy: You'll either obey me (and you, too, sir, listen to me) or I'll make you . . . man and wife! Come on, then, hold each other's hands, kiss, and seal the deal! And, now that you're together, I'll disappoint you again, with the further condition . . . God bless you! Are you happy?
Imply that fair England's peace depends on this marriage.
This is weird, I think I'm starting to be less popular here. Why isn't he saying anything? Hello, Camillo.
Just in time, Iago.
What is your name? And why do you come here before King Richard in his royal lists? Whom are you here to oppose? And what's your argument? Speak like a true knight, so help you God!
I beg your pardon, sir. I'm embarrassed, but thank you.
No, uncle, but the annoyances on the way made the journey tedious, tiring, and dull. I wish more uncles were here to welcome me.
It's him. God and Saint Stephen give you good evening; I've brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons.
So, pretty girl, how long have you been working in this business?
I kiss the letter that contains their commands.
With all my heart I pray to the gods that she will!
My receipt is for fifty talents.
Indeed, I was the one who told them to do itthey got their cunning from their mother, like a trump card that always wins the match. But their violence, I think, they learned from me, like a dog that goes for the bull's head. Well, my deeds will show what I'm made of. Plotting with the queen and her two sons, I lured your brothers to the hole where Bassianus's dead body lay; I wrote the letter that your father found and hid the gold mentioned in the letter, in league with the queen and her sons. What has happened that made you suffer that I wasn't involved with in some way? I cheated your father out of his hand, and when I had it, I broke down with laughter as soon as I was out of your sight. When he got his two sons' heads in exchange for his hand, I saw his tears from a hiding spot in the wall and laughed so hard that I cried too. When I told the empress this funny story, she almost fainted with pleasure, and as a reward gave me twenty kisses.
As far as I'm concerned, I hope to go to heavenno offense to the general or any noble man.
[To TYBALT] Get up, sir, and come with me. By the name of the Prince, I command you to obey.
Ah, Buckingham, now I must test you to see if you're true gold indeed. Young Prince Edward is alive. Think about what I might say next.
Orsino, this is the same Antonio who took our ship the Phoenix and its cargo from Crete, and who boarded the Tiger in the battle where your young nephew Titus lost his leg. We arrested him here in the streets, where he was recklessly brawling as if he didn't care that we were looking for him.
Look, look, King Richard has appeared in person, like the angry sun from the fiery portal of the east, when it seems the jealous clouds intend to dim his brightness as he travels to the west.
Everything's ready. So please, give me the news.
[To himself] Next I'll tell the king they escaped and where they're headed. I'm hoping he'll go after them and that I'll get to come along to see my beloved country, Sicily.
You've stolen it from her?
Ah! So you're scoundrel too!
Madam, that young fellow out there swears that he must speak with you no matter what. I told him you were sick. He claims to know that already, and says that that's why he came to speak with you. I told him you were asleep. He claims to know that already too, and said that that's why he came to speak with you. What should I say to him, lady? He's too strong for all my excuses.
Why, Apemantus?
Why would she want me killed? As far as I can remember, I've never done anything to hurt her in my life. I've never said a mean word or done a bad thing to a single living creature. Believe me, I never killed a mouse or even hurt a fly! Once I stepped on a worm on accident, and I cried. How have I offended her enough that she would want to kill me? How would she gain from my death? How is she threatened by my life?
Why, man?
Don't touch her, Prince Pericles, if you value your life. That's the law, and it's as dangerous as the rest. Your time is up! Tell us the answer now, or prepare to die.
Good lord!
What, was she raped? Tell us who did it.
Rub his temples.
Say that it's true.
Cambio.
[As LUCENTIO] Oh spiteful love! Faithless womankind! I tell you, Litio, it's incredible!
Look, Demetrius, here's the son of Luciusand he's got some message to give us.
[As LUCENTIO] Sir, this is the house. Do you want me to knock?
Think about happier things.
By morning, if the wind stops.
Fool, no one has ever been abused like I've been. I'm just as sane as you are, Fool.
All the shattered pieces of a ruined house.
I'm a fool! A fool! A fool!
I promise you, it was Carthage.
Madam, I dont know, and I dont care: I would rather be nothing than one of them.
And will I say no to you? No, I won't. Goodbye, my husband.
Why do you care?
I can't, ma'am. I have orders to do exactly the opposite.
What would you rather me be, if not a woman?
If you don't have an important purpose for it, then give it back to me. Poor Desdemona, she'll be so upset when she realizes it's missing.
With patience,  as all prisoners must, noble lord. But I will live to thank those who imprisoned me, my lord, by taking revenge.
You're a fool. If Echo were as fast, he'd be worth a dozen Belmans. But feed them all well and look after them. I intend to go hunting again tomorrow.
Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Has any man rebused your Worship?
Please do go see him.
What does the king have to do now? Must he submit? The king shall do it. Must he be deposed? The king will be satisfied. Must he lose the name of king? In God's name, let it go: I'll exchange my jewels for a set of beads, my gorgeous palace for a hermitage, my fine clothes for a beggar's gown, my engraved goblets for a wooden dish, my scepter for a pilgrim's walking staff, and my large kingdom for a little grave, a little little grave, an obscure grave. Or I'll be buried in the king's highway, some common road, where the feet of my subjects can trample on their sovereigns' headfor they tread on my heart while I live, so why not on my head after I'm dead[Notices that Aumerle is crying]  Aumerle, you're crying, my tender-hearted cousin! Our tears will make bad weather; our sighs will tear the summer corn from its stems, making a famine in this rebellious land. Or, shall we make a game of it, dropping all our tears in one place, until they have made a pair of graves within the earth, and lie in themthere lies two kinsmen who digged their own graves with tears. Wouldn't that be funny? Well, well, I see I'm just babbling, and you laugh at me.
Hey, well done, my spirit! But did this happen near the shore?
Yes, if I know the letters and the language.
[To RICHARD] Dream about your nephews, smothered in the Tower. Richard, may we weigh down your soul like lead, and drag you down to ruin, shame, and death. Your nephews' souls tell you to despair and die!
They answered in unison that they would like to help, but do not have enough to spare. They did say they were sorry and that they liked you, and that they had no idea anything was wrong with your estate. They lamented that even the noblest men can come upon bad luck, wished life were better, and said it was all so sad. Then they moved on to what they said were more serious matters, and shared looks of disgust and hard, half-uttered sentences. Then they were so gruff with their grudging salutes and cold nods that I was shocked into silence.
My lord.
If I ask him for my place as lieutenant back, he'll say that I am a drunkard. If I had as many mouths as the Hydra to ask him with, he'd say no to each one. How strange it is that I should be a sensible man, but occasionally foolish, and then just now a beast! Every drink is unblessed, and alcohol is a devil.
I haven't heard anything either, and I haven't suspected anything.
As if the island had lungsrotten lungs.
No.
What will you do?
What did the fired man just say?
[Presenting a paper] Here's my challenge; read it. I promise that it's feisty enough.
Drunk?
My belovedas my deeds will prove.
Don't poison her. Strangle her in her bedthe very bed she contaminated with her affair.
Does he still have his wits? Has he gone crazy, too?
Poison never came from so sweet a place.
Unless York succeeds in beating back Bolingbroke.
Good honest men! You draw the best portrait in all of Athens. Yes, you are the best, your counterfeits are the most lifelike.
What, weren't you all snarling at each other before I cameabout to jump at each others' throats like dogs? And now you're turning all your hatred on me? Did the Duke of York's curse have so much power that Henry's death; my lovely Edward's death; the loss of their kingdom; and my sad banishment were all required to avenge the death of that peevish brat Rutland? Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven? Well then, open up, you dark cloudsand hear my strong curses! Though your Yorkist king didn't die in battle, may he die from his gluttony, just as our Lancastrian kingmy husbandwas murdered to give your king his throne.
[To himself] I only want to deal with unfeeling fools and careless boys. I want nothing to do with anyone who can read me well. Ambitious Buckingham is growing too thoughtful.
I will. And Ill find out how she feels about marrying you early tomorrow. Tonight she is locked in her room with her sadness.
There's no one like him, almost born to be forever generous. He exceeds everyone else.
Everything would seem strange to him when he woke up.
Oh, help me, help me! Get these rags off me, so I can die in peace!
I can imagine more than I can sayI have more on my mind than words. Anyone who can count how much he has is poor. My true love has made me so rich that I cant count even half of my wealth.
Not now, lieutenant. It's not ten o'clock yet. Our general left us so early so he could spend time with his love Desdemonaand who could blame him? They haven't slept together yet, and she's beautiful enough to catch Jove's eye.
Bad luck, do you move so quickly that I'm the last to know it? Oh, I see, you think to come to me last, so that I'll be sorry for longer. Come ladies, go, let's meet the king at London. What, was I born for this, that I should give Bolingbroke satisfaction by looking sad at his triumph? Gardener, for telling me this sad news, I pray to God your plants may never grow.
Goodbye, gentlemen. [She starts to exit]
I humbly thank you for this.
[As LUCENTIO] And are the bride and bridegroom coming home?
Close by the shore, my master.
Without joy, there is only grief.
Cousin Buckingham, a word with you. [They move aside and speak so the others can't hear] Catesby has sounded Hastings about our business, and he found the quick-tempered gentleman to be so passionately opposed to our plan thatas Hastings devotedly put ithe would lose his head before he'd allow his master's child to lose the throne of England.
It isn't lost, but what if it were?
It's better that you haven't.
Here's a baby far too young to be on board this ship. If she were smart, she'd die, just like I'm about to do. Here's all that's left of your dead queen.
Second: he's the governor of this country, and I'm bound to serve him.
Let's go. It's hopeless.
Then thus I turn away from my country's light, to live in dark shades of endless night.
Ma'am
No doubt, no doubt. And so will Clarence, for the people who were your enemies are now his enemies, and they've overcome him just like they overcame you.
I know what her answer will be.
[Striking him back] Well then, take that, and that, and that. Has everyone gone mad? [Draws his dagger]
And what do you see in his heart today, based on the cheer in his face?
Go to the Earl of Wiltshire straight away, Bushy, and tell him to go to Ely House to see to this business. We'll go to Ireland the day after next: it's time to, I think. In our absence, we appoint our uncle York lord governor of England, for he is just and always loved us well. Come on, our queen: tomorrow must we part; be merry, for our time together is short.
You have enough holy feeling in your souls to advise me to make my peace with God. But you're still willing to disobey God by murdering me? Oh, sirs, consider this: those who sent you to do this deed will hate you for doing it.
That Gonzalo is quite the doctor, isn't he?
[Reading] "You came to the lady Olivia, and she was kind to you in front of me. But you lie like a dog. That's not what I'm challenging you about."
No, Ill resist such treatment until my enemy overpowers me.
You're right, darn it, we will. Even brides are afraid of the wedding night, though they have no reason to be.
Didn't you hear her, fellows? Take the lady away.
It was just, though. Even though he was a great king, his greatness couldn't shield him from heaven's wrath. His sin got its reward.
Oh knight, you need some wine. Have you ever been put down like that before?
Calling my servants around me, dressed in my embroidered velvet gown, having just come from the sofa where I've left Olivia sleeping
Will you help mean ass, and a fool, and a bastard, a gullible skinny bastard?
The king? Who's that?
What is it, Iago?
Walking, my friend, walking.
Yes, that's right. And he was so humbled and troubled that now I feel sad for him. My love, call him back here.
Stop, villains! We are the empress's sons.
Plain and not honest is too harsh to hear. Lies need some decoration.
If you are willing, Timon sent
And you're definitely not the brightest bulb on the tree. As much as I am a fool, that's how much intelligence you lack.
Just a moment, good Nurse. In an hour, behind the abbey wall, one of my servants will meet you and give you a rope ladder. Ill then use the ladder to secretly climb up to Juliets room tonight. Farewell. Be worthy of my trust, and Ill repay you for your help. Farewell. Speak well of me to your mistress.
No, you're joking. I've seen a lady's nose that was blue, but never her eyebrows.
You lie there now [Maria throws down a letter], for here comes the fish that must be caught by tickling it.
You're not going to say anything good about me, are you?
You said it in a rage. Say it again, and as soon as you finish speaking, my handwhich killed your lover out of love for youwill kill your far truer lover. You will be the cause of both these deaths.
Sir, my king, dont waste your time obsessing about the strangeness of what's happened. At the right time, which will be soon, I myself will explainand it will be an explanation that you'll think is reasonableabout everything that's occurred. Until then, be cheerful and be generous in your thoughts about each thing that's happened.[To ARIEL so that only he can hear] Come here, spirit. Set Caliban and his companions free. Undo the spell that binds them.
Rome will hate her if this foul thing lives.
Dont punish me, please. Ill bring the wood home faster.
Boy, come here. This is no time for jokes, so get serious. Your fellow Tranio here has taken on my outward appearance to save my life, and I have put on his appearance in order to escape. I've been in a fight since we came ashore, and I killed a man. I'm afraid that someone saw me. So for now you must wait on Tranio like he's your master, while I make my escape and save my life. Do you understand me?
I say amen to that.
Then that was proof that she loves you.
By God! It makes me angry! Day and night, hour after hour, through tide and time, working or playing, alone or with company, Ive worked to get her a fine match. Now, Ive gotten her a noble gentleman, whos good-looking, young, well-educated, and honorable, whos the man of any girls dreams. And this wretched, crying fool, like a whining puppet, responds to this good fortune by answering, I wont marry. I cant love. Im too young. Forgive me. Well, if you wont get married, heres how Ill forgive you. Eat wherever you want, except in my house. Think about that. Im not joking. Thursday is soon. Cover your heart with your hand and listen to my advice. Act like my daughter, and Ill marry you to my friend. Dont, and you can beg, starve, and die in the streets. By my soul, Ill never again acknowledge you or help you. Count on it. Think about it. I wont break this oath.
Welcome, Aemilius. What's happening in Rome?
What, are you hurt?
What, my dear Nurse?
No, come out with it, and let him never speak again that betrays you by repeating what he hears!
Then, listen to me: If you're determined to leave the country, go to Sicily, introduce yourself, and call your bride a princess. If she's going to visit Leontes's court, it's only fitting that she be dressed as your royal wife should. I can imagine Leontes greeting you with a hug, crying as he asks your forgiveness as if you were your own father. He'll kiss your princess's hands. His kindness will be a complete departure from the cruelty you've heard about in the past. He's over that now; he's kicked his evil ways to hell and has been nurturing his better qualities all these years.
My father has an army; ask about him and learn to make a whole body from a single limb.
Oh, Diana, where am I? Where's my husband? What is this place?
Yes, your husband.
Does she love him?
Come, come, my little wasp. Really, you're too angry.
Then it belongs to her, my lord. And since it is hers, she may give it to any man she wants.
Sir
If I really thought that, I'd give up beef altogether. I think I'll ride home tomorrow, Sir Toby.
The answer is "yes" if you're asking to marry my daughter. It seems you've been kind to her.
Can you teach all those things?
Shes grieving too much over Tybalts death, so I havent talked to her about love. Romantic love cant flourish during times of mourning. Now, sir, her father thinks its dangerous that she has given herself so fully to sorrow. In his wisdom, hes rushing our marriage in order to stop her tears. She is alone all the time and thinking too much about her grief. Some company might help her to stop crying. Now you know the reason for this hurry to the wedding.
Woof, woof! [The sound of dogs barking offstage]
I mean to look into that, too, and to keep on eye on our opportunities in this business. I'll outwit the old graybeard, Gremio, the overbearing father, Minola, and the crafty musican, Litio the loverall for the sake of my master Lucentio.
She's alive! Look, her eyelids, which cover the beautiful eyes which Pericles has lost, are just beginning to separate their eyelashes. Now her sparkling eyes are appearingand what a treasure they are.[To THAISA] Live, and bring tears to our eyes with your sad story, beautiful lady. We can tell how special you are.
will satisfy your father.
Your father! Oh you villain! Your father is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
Who else comes after me? By God, Ill beat you all; I have a thousand spirits in my heart and could answer twenty thousand challenges.
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord, when she was a little babyOh, there is one nobleman in the city, Paris, who would gladly lay claim to her. But Juliet, good soul that she is, would rather be with a toad, a toad, than him. Sometimes I make her angry by telling her that Paris is better looking than you. I swear to you, when I say that she turns as white as any sheet in the entire world. Dont rosemary and Romeo begin with the same letter?
I wish you were clean enough to spit on.
This place is full of traitors!
So treat him as well as my faithfulnes deserves.
The monkey herself must be spreading this rumor. She is convinced I will marry her, driven by her own love and self-flattery. I haven't promised her anything.
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand and bow my knee before his majesty. Mowbray and I are like two men about to go on a long and tiring  pilgrimage,  so let us say a loving goodbye to our friends.
Here's one (set to a very sad tune) about how a banker's wife gave birth to twenty money bags and how, during the pregnancy, she had cravings for snakes' heads and grilled frogs.
Nurse?
No, no. I already knew everything you just said. What did he say about our marriage? What about that?
Seven of my servants obediently would go to find him. I frown while I wait, and perhaps wind my watch, or play with mywith some rich jewel I'm wearing. Toby approaches me and bows
If we don't, it will be the worst mistake of our lives.
Even the poorest service is repaid with thanks, and mine will be too, before you touch the meat.
But it will be hard for you to maintain that when the king is against you. One of two things will have to happen: you'll stop pursuing me, or I'll become a different person.
Dont be frightened. The island is full of noises, sounds, and sweet music that will delight you and not hurt you. Sometimes I hear a thousand instruments playing in my ears, and sometimes I hear voices that send me back to sleep even if I had just woken up. And once asleep again, I dream of clouds that open up to show that they carry riches, which will soon drop down on me like rain. So when I woke up, I begged to dream again.
Indeed, and what do we make of these people?
Surehim, everyone, the earth, and the heavens. Even if I were king of the whole world, the most handsome man alive, and wiser than anyone in history, it wouldn't matter without her love. Everything I do, I do for her. I put my gifts and my faults into her hands, for better or worse.
Where could I have lost that handkerchief, Emilia?
God bless you!
With adoration, with abundant tears, with thunderous groans, with passionate sighs.
I'll go and tell him what you say, my lord.
Why?
Yes.
Of course, I can imitate the best of tragic actors. I can speak, and then look back, and search all around me, trembling, and jump at the least movement as if I were paranoid. Frightened looks and forced smiles are both at my service, ready to perform their functions whenever I need them. But what, has Catesby gone?
Oh, he has a traitors heart hidden behind a pretty face! Did any dragon ever nest in such a pretty cave? Hes a beautiful tyrant! A fiendish angel! A raven hiding under the feathers of a dove! A lamb that kills like a wolf! A hateful reality hidden by a beautiful appearance. The exact opposite of what he seemed. He seemed like a saint, but should be damned! Hes a villain who seemed honorable! Oh nature, what were you doing in hell when you placed the soul of a devil in the paradise of such a perfect man? Has any book with such awful contents ever had a more beautiful cover? Oh, how could such betrayal hide in such a gorgeous body?
What does she say about my noble ancestry?
Think what you want. We'll take his jewelry, his goods, his money and his lands.
[To HERMIONE] You've made the mistake, sweetheart: mistaking Polixenes for Leontes. You monster! I can't call you a queen anymore, because if I did, the word "queen" would cease to mean anything. You might as well call a beggar a queen. [To all] I've said it: she's having an affair, and I said with whom. On top of that, she's a traitor and Camillo is in cahoots with her. He knew all about the dirty deeds she and Polixenes got up to. He knew she was a whore and he knew all about their plan to escape.
[To ALONSO, ANTONIO, andSEBASTIAN] The three of you are sinners. Destinywhich controls the earth and everything in itcaused the sea to throw you up onto this uninhabited island, because you are unfit to live among other people. I have driven you crazy, and men with the reckless courage given by insanity often hang or drown themselves. [ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO draw their swords] You fools, my fellow harpies and I are the agents of Fate. Your swords would be no more useful for injuring the whistling winds or stabbing the wateralways closing up around the hole your sword makes in itthan they would be for cutting off even one of my feathers. My comrades are just as indestructible. And even if you could hurt us, Ive made your swords too heavy for you to lift. But rememberbecause reminding you of this is why Im herethat in Milan the three of you overthrew Prospero, and abandoned him in the ocean with his innocent child. Now the ocean has paid you back for your evil actions. The godsdelaying their punishment, not forgetting ithave raised up the seas, the land, and every creature against you and any hope you may have had of peace. From you, Alonso, theyve taken your son, and have commanded that I inflict upon you a slow ruin that follows you step-by-step, and is worse than a quick death. The only way to protect yourself from the anger of the godswhich here, on this deserted island, will otherwise fall on your headsis for you to feel truly sorry in your heart for what youve done, and from now on to live good and moral lives.
Noble Othello, I am seriously injured. So that I save my energy by not speaking, your officer Iago can tell you all that I know. I don't know of anything I said or did wrong, unless taking care of yourself is a vice, and defending ourselves when someone attacks us is a sin.
[To TURIO] You are all the more degenerate and lowly, because you went to such lengths to win her, and then just left her based on such insubstantial grounds. [To VALENTINE] Now, by the honor of my ancestry, I congratulate your spirit, Valentine. And I think you are worthy of an empress' love. Know that I will now forget all previous trouble, cancel all hatred, and allow you to return to your home again. Ask for a new set of circumstances based on your unquestionable merit, and I'll agree to them.Sir Valentine, you are a gentleman. Take Silvia, because you have earned her.
Are you trying to ruin this? Oh, my bitter husband, my hard-hearted lord, to set our words against yours! [To Bolingbroke] Say "pardon" as we do it in our country; we don't understand French. Your eye begins to say it; may your tongue say it too; or put your heart in your ear, so that, hearing our prayers, it might take pity on us and command your mouth to say the words.
What do you say to that, Malvolio?
At Friar Patrick's cell, where I intend to make a holy confession.
And expensive from the looks of it. Look at how it shines!
The king will come this way; this is the way to Julius Caesars tower, where my lord is condemned by proud Bolingbroke to be a prisoner. Let us rest here, if this rebellious earth can offer any rest for her true kings queen.
Ah, I knew that.[To HERMIONE] Give me the boy. I'm glad you didn't breastfeed him. Even though he looks kind of like me, you have too many of your genes in him already.
Be quiet or go away, I warn you.
I have the whole barrel, man. I keep it in my wine cellara cave by the seaside, where I've stowed away the wine barrel.[To CALIBAN] Whats going on, monster? How is your fever?
Very brief, and full of good sense... or nonsense.
[To RICHARD] You bloody, guilty man, wake up full of guilt and then die in a bloody battle! Remember Lord Hastings. Despair, and die!
Husband, let's follow them and see how all this turns out.
I would bet my life that some villainsome scheming, insinuating rogue, some deceitful, double-crossing roguehas slandered Desdemona in order to get some military position. If I'm wrong, let me be hanged!
What's going on, my friend? Why do you look so pale?
Hello to you, sir.
I'm following the man I love more than I love my eyes or my life, more, far more, than I'll ever love a wife. If I'm lying about this, you angels above, put me to death for dishonoring my love.
[She takes FERDINAND's hand] And here's mine, with my heart in it. And now goodbye until half an hour from now.
No, I've offered everything I own. I have nothing left. She can't have more than all I have.
Then pack up your instruments and go. Vanish into the air. Go!
Well, gentlemen, I have decided. Next Sunday my daughter Katherina is to be married, you know.
Her father is Baptista Minola, an agreeable and polite gentleman. Her name is Katherina Minola, famous in Padua for her scolding tongue.
Oh, you who are so skilled in curses, stay a while and teach me how to curse my enemies.
My Lord of Gloucester, for too long I've suffered your blunt insults and your bitter scorn. By heaven, I will tell the king about the vile taunts I've endured. I would rather be a country servant-maid than a great queen in such a situationto be so taunted, scorned, and attacked.
And I hope I never see you again.
Yes, you jackass.
The fact that he's a little crazy makes him seem even more noble. I could spot it a mile away.
Good man, please remember whom youve got on board.
[To himself] Something strange is going on. Where is all this leading? I must be mad, or else this is a dream. But if this is my imagination, then let me forget my sense of reality. And if dreaming is like this, then let me sleep!
You and Henry of Lancaster should both go to the devil! I'm tired of being patient.
Sit, sir, sit.
He said he's coming back immediately and commanded me to go to bed and dismiss you for the night.
Why, didn't you come from heaven?
Listen, I hear them ringing the bell.
Lucentio! Oh, he's murdered his master! Arrest him, I charge you in the Duke's name. Oh my son, my son! Tell me, you villain, where is my son Lucentio?
Are you his father?
And throw its seeds in the sea to make more islands grow.
Is it still that early?
Look!
She has, and in doing so she wastes her beauty, because by living in chastity she ensures that she will never pass her beauty on to her children. Shes too beautiful, and too smart, to be allowed to gain entrance to Heaven by making me despair. Shes sworn never to love, and in that vow has sentenced me to a kind of living death.
She doesn't think so; look at this letter.
If that's true, then let the Turks take Cyprus from us, and we'll be fine as long as we smile. It's easy to use a proverb when you're not the one suffering a loss, and not so easy when you're the one suffering grief. These sayings mean nothing. I've never heard of a time someone's broken heart was made better by words. I humbly beg you to move on to the state business.
[Returning] My lord, I ask you not to worry about this anymore. Give it some time. It is right for Cassio to get his place as lieutenant backfor sure, he's very good at the jobbut if you wait for a while you will get a better idea of what he's up to. Take note if your wife strongly insists that you reinstate him. That would mean a lot. In the meantime, just think that I'm being overly suspicious in my fearsand I have good reason to think I may beand I beg you to consider Desdemona innocent.
Well, he said that he didI don't know what he did.
Its day. It is. Get going, be gone, go away! Its the lark thats singing so harshly and out of tune. Some say the larks singing makes a sweet transition between day and night. Thats not true, because the song divides the two of us. Some say the lark and the disgusting toad traded eyes. Now I wish they had also traded voices because the larks voice pulls us from each others arms, and sets men hunting after you. Oh, get going. Its getting more and more light.
Send out a junior officer to Stanley's regiment. Tell Stanley to bring his army here before sunrise, or else his son George will go to his eternal rest.
I'll have my head cut from my shoulders before I'll see the crown so terribly misplaced. But do you think that's his intention?
You could only be ruined if I left you, but that will never happen! Chin up! My father can disown me; I have my love to sustain me.
Since what I'm about to say can only be a rejection of my accusations, and the only testimony this court will hear on my behalf is my own, it's hardly worth it for me to say "not guilty." Since you've already decided I'm a liar, you'll only interpret my words as lies. But listen: if God watches over us, as he does, then I'm sure that innocence will triumph over false accusations, and that patience will defeat tyranny. [To LEONTES] You should know better than anyone (though, at the moment, you seem to know the least) how pure and faithful I've been my entire life. No falsified history can change that, no matter how well it's fabricated and performed for spectators. Look at me: I'm the king's wife (making me half of the royal government), the daughter of a powerful king, the mother of a young prince, and I'm standing here babbling on to defend my life and reputation to any old person who'll come and listen. Honestly? My life is about as precious to me as my grief, which I'd rather not have to bear. I care about my reputation because it affects my children's future; that's the only reason I stand here now.Sir, I appeal to your own conscience. Remember how much you loved meand how much I deserved itbefore Polixenes came to your court. Since he came, I've only tried to remain worthy of your love. If I've done a single thing outside the demands of duty, either in thought or deed, then everyone who hears me can hate me and my own family can curse my grave!
A mother never suffered so great a loss. Alas, I am the mother of these griefs. Each of you has only a single loss, while I suffer all of them. Elizabeth weeps for Edward, and so do I, but she does not weep for Clarence like I do. These children weep for Clarence, and so do I, but they don't weep for Edward like I do. You three should pour all your tears onto me. I will be your sorrow's nurse, and feed your tears with more mourning.
Think, my lord?
He wished you good health.
Only that which will, I hope, please God above, and all good men of this ungoverned island.
Terrible fate! By my brotherhood, the letter was not just a friendly greeting. It was full of important news. That it was never sent may result in great ruin. Friar John, go and get me an iron crowbar and bring it straight back to my cell.
Now, Lychorida!
She says you must be playing some kind of joke. She will not come. She tells you to come to her.
Is he here right now? Lucilius!
I truly believe that virtue and wisdom are more important to have than status and wealth. Careless children can ruin and waste the latter, but the former last forever, making humans like gods. As everyone knows, I've studied medicine for a long time, the secrets of which I've discovered through reading old experts and through my own experience. I'm now familiar with the powerful potions to be found in plants, metals, and stones. And I can talk about the good and bad that Nature is capable of, all of which I enjoy this a lot more than I would trying to earn money or win other people's approval; that's totally worthless.
[Giving him money] Here's some gold to thank you for telling me this. My own escape gives me hope for my brother, and what you've told me now gives me even more reason to hope. Do you know this country?
Take his sword away from him.
Why didnt they just kill us when they took us from Milan?
The sound is going away. Lets follow it, and complete our plan after that.
But did you see them dead?
Probably because the emperor has a son.
Take this mad fool to jail.Father Baptista, make sure that he's ready to appear in court when he's called.
Yes, thats the truth.
A man, like you are.
By heaven, that's an excellent song.
Come, hurry, hurry. Prepare my horse. Call up Lord Stanley. Tell him to bring his army. I will lead my soldiers in the field, with my army arranged like this: the front lines will be equal parts horsemen and foot soldiers and our archers will be placed in the middle. Johnthe Duke of Norfolkand Thomasthe Earl of Surreywill lead the horsemen and foot soldiers. With them placed like this, I will follow with the main army, which will be defended on both sides by our best horsemen. We will have all this, and Saint George on our side as well. What do you think, Norfolk?
Yes, that's right. You played it excellently. Well, you've come at just the right time, especially because I have some special entertainment planned and could use your acting skills. There is a lord who will watch you perform tonight, but I'm worried about your self-controlfor his Honor has never seen a play beforeand I fear that you might notice his odd behavior and burst out laughing, and offend him. I tell you, sirs, if you even smile, he will notice.
I cannot.
Enough of your witchcraft, you hateful, withered hag.
Be loud and obnoxious, and go beyond the limits of decency and civility if you have tojust don't come back without having spoken to her.
Then she's gone to hell as a liar. I'm the one who killed her.
Is he not a jealous man?
Take away your most prized possession.
Oh, my fair nephew, I can't say that.
Good, I am satisfied. Give me some wine. I don't have the same energetic spirit or optimistic mind that I used to. Set down the goblet. Is the ink and paper ready?
I would say "it's too bad she hasn't had an education," but she seems more capable than most teachers I know.
Shut your filthy mouth!
Oh, where?
You could say that, for it was that hand that gave you my heart.
He got married.
Cassio will take over for me here. And, sir, tonight I ask you to have dinner together with me. Welcome to Cyprus, sir. Oh, goats and monkeys!
Yes, of course. Unless I'm mistaken, Sir Baptista might remember me, Sir Vincentio, from when we both stayed at the Pegasus in Genoa nearly twenty years ago.
If you believe it should be true, a true gentleman can swear it on behalf of his friend. I'lI swear to the prince that you're hardworking and not likely to get drunk, but I know you're not hardworking and very likely to get drunk. So I hope that, when I do swear it, you'll make a better effort to be hardworking and not a drunk.
[From multiple places offstage, at different times] Bow-wow.
[To herself] Because such an ass owns them.
I'd trust him about as much as my enemy and just give up thieving altogether.
That is why we wanted you here, your Lordshipto avoid the condemnation of the critical public.
Long live the senate!
You sad man, Im not Tamora. Shes your enemy, and Im your friend. I am Revenge, sent from hell to ease your mind, vulture-like in the way it gnaws at you, by taking bloody vengeance on your enemies. Come down, and welcome me to this world; talk to me about murder and death. There isnt a hollow cave, secret hideaway, obscure place, or misty valley where they can hide that I wont find them. Ill whisper  Revenge" in their ears, and the criminals will quake with fear.
Come now, where are all the gentlemen? Is anyone at home?
And I bet Petruchio will catch the Kate soon enough!
Oh, Hastings; Edward's children; Grey and Rivers; holy King Henry and your fair son Edward; Vaughan; and all who have died because of underhanded, corrupt, foul injusticeif your angry souls still cannot rest and are witnessing this scene through the clouds, then enjoy your revenge and mock my destruction.
Yes, beyond anything a doctor can help with.
I humbly thank you, my Lord. There is nothing that should come to me that I do not owe to you!
[So only GRUMIO can hear] Grumio, hush!
And please ask him not to use any inappropriate language in his songs.
If they hadn't left so quickly, I would have died of laughing.
What do you mean, sweetheart? Is this a metaphor?
Please sir, go out and then let us know who has arrived.
By the world then
Taurus! But that governs the torso and the heart.
I will never say no to you! All I ask of you right now is that you leave me alone for a bit.
I've been thinking how I might compare my prison to the world: but because the world is full of people and here there's no one but me, I can't do it. But I'll give it a try. My brain will be the mother and my soul will be the father, and together they'll produce a generation of children, my thoughts. Those thoughts will populate this little worldthey'll have moods just like people in the real world, none of them satisfied. The better sort of thoughts, thoughts of heaven, have too many doubts and make me read the Bible against itself: for example, "Come, little one" versus "It is as hard to come as for a camel to thread the eye of a small needle." Ambitious thoughts dwell on ways to escape, like tearing a passage through my rough prison walls with my weak fingernailsand since, there's no hope of escape, die before they have the chance to go any further. Happier thoughts flatter themselves that they aren't the first people to be unlucky, and won't be the last: like beggars sitting in the stocks who tell themselves that many have and other will be in the same place, and in that thought find a kind of comfort, imagining others who have endured the same misfortunes. So I, in one person, play many peoplenone happy. Sometimes I'm a king; then treason makes me wish to be a beggar (and so I am); then crushing suffering persuades me that it was better when I was a king; then I'm king again, but soon remember that Bolingbroke has taken my throne, and I am nothing at all. But whatever I am, neither I nor anyone will pleased with anything, unless he's happy with being nothing. Is this music that I'm hearing?
Do you know where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
Follow me, then.[To HELICANUS] Helicanus, can we have a word?
Now, by the gods, I feel sorry for him and will cheer him up. Come on, gentlemen, we're spending too much time on little things. Let's not waste time any longer; let's find another pastime. Even in your armor, as you're dressed, you'll look great dancing a soldier's dance. No excuses; no one say the music is too loud for the ladies. We all know that ladies love to dance with soldiers as much as they like to get in bed with them!
You are a fool to bid me farewell twice.
[Taking JULIETs hand] If I offend you by touching your holy hand with my own unworthy one, then my lips stand ready, like two blushing pilgrims, to smooth my rough touch with a gentle kiss.
The name was given to me by a powerful person: my father, who was a king.
Be quiet, Sir Gremio. I say he will go to prison.
But is he often this drunk?
As far as Michael Cassio goes, I think I can swear that he is honest.
I haven't done anything to deserve this.
Ha!
You can't come in here.
Keep it. It won't feed me.
Go back to your lord. I cannot love him. Tell him not to send any more messengersunless, perhaps, you were to return and tell me how he takes my rejection. Farewell. Thank you for your trouble. Here is something for you to spend. [Offers VIOLA money]
I brought mighty Herefordif you call him thatjust to the next highway, and left him there.
By heaven, I wish I had forgotten about it. You told meoh, it comes back to my memory, like the bad omen of a raven coming over a house where someone is sickthat Cassio had my handkerchief.
Where?
[To YORK] Come, come, my boy. We'll go take sanctuary. Madam, farewell.
Then I'm sure you'll also deny that you were the cause of Lord Hastings' recent imprisonment
Hurry up. The hour of death has come.
[To the SHEPHERD'S SON] Please buy it.
What, by God, may she do?
They disappeared in a strange way.
Now, I swear by my mother's son, and that's myself, it will be the moon, or a star, or whatever I want it to be before I'll journey on to your father's house.
No, your beauty was the cause of my deedsyour beauty that haunted my sleep, and could have convinced me to kill the whole world to have just an hour of intimacy with you.
Why, so I did. But I didn't want any reply from you. Oh, let me finish my curse!
I agree. He must face the rule of law.
Ha! Am I king? Perhaps it's sobut Edward still lives.
[Whispering] Quiet, quiet!
Ah, it's terrible that liars can steal the appearance of gentle people, and hide their wickedness under a virtuous mask. Yes, he is my son. And in being my son, he is the source of my shame as a mother. But he didn't get his deceitfulness from my breast.
I am still consistent, my lord.
We're not, sir, and probably won't be. Pigs will fly before that happens. The odds don't seem to be in our favor.
To tell you where he sleeps would be to tell you where I lie.
Hunting what, Curio?
What is it to me, father?
I couldn't stay behind. My desire to go was sharper than a knife, and it spurred me onward. It wasn't just love for you, though that much might have inspired a man to go on an even longer voyage. I was also worried about what might happen to you in your travels, since you don't know this area, and it can be rough and inhospitable to a stranger without a guide or friend. My willing love for you, combined with these fears for your safety, drove me to follow you.
Yes, my lord?
I don't know what to say. Give me your hands. May God give you joy, Petruchio. It's a match.
Really? Here comes my daughter; she can prove it.
Your speech is worse than leprosy.
I did see them speaking to one another.
Yes, sir.
Whoa, what a wave of vanity comes this way! The performers dance! They are mad women and celebrate their madness as if it were the glory of this life. The way this feast exceeds the basic necessities of oil and root makes us all seem like fools to forget ourselves and waste our time flattering these men and drinking to the health of those who eventually stop giving in old age and we come to hate and envy. Who alive is not either deprived or deprives others of wealth? Who dies that does not disrespect the graves of friends who once gave to them? I should be afraid of these people who dance in front of me right now, because one day they might stamp on me. It has happened before. Men shut their doors to those who decline in age like the setting sun.
[As LUCENTIO] You mean he's more of a shrew than she is? Why, that's impossible.
It's just the wind
So you're a beast, and I'm your colleague! I don't think so. Away with you, you tiny fool!
Yes, that's my husband's name.
Sir, is all of your family safely inside?
What do you think I should do?
You're out of tune, sir. You lie. [To MALVOLIO] You're nothing more than a steward. Do you think that just because you are boring and virtuous, food and wine will disappear?
My lord, I don't dare; Sir Pierce of Exton, who came here on the king's orders, commands that I don't taste your food for poison.
Be careful, Sir Baptista, or else you'll be tricked by this business. I would dare to swear that this is the real Vincentio.
What is he doing here? He's not arriving with his father's usual style. This can't be plannedhe must have been forced to visit suddenly by some accident. Who did he bring with him?
He is a terrible villain. Take this weapon that I have obtained from the Moor. Go, guard the outer door. Don't let Iago get out. Kill him instead. I'll chase after the same villain, for he is a damned scoundrel.
I'll be well-armed against them, like a mountain in the wind. Even if it keeps blowing forever, the mountain never shakes.
All those men must be under some wicked influence, because they all denied him.
What have you discovered?
True, noble prince.
Because the good queen asked.
[To himself] I must marry my brother Edward's daughter, or else my kingdom is only standing on fragile glass. Murder her brothers, and then marry herit's a strange way to go about things. But I'm so steeped in blood at this point that one sin must follow another. These eyes of mine have no tears of pity.
[To herself] By Juno, queen of marriage: everything I eat tastes bland; I only want to taste him. [To SIMONIDES] He's definitely an rich gentleman.
Well, none but Humphrey Hour, who once invited you to have breakfast without my company. If I'm so displeasing to look at, then let me march on and not offend you, madam.
Sir, no one likes to hear their sins repeated back to themit would offend you to hear me say it. Anyone who found out about this before probably kept their mouth shut rather than telling. Evil spreads as quickly as dust on the wind. As the dust surrounds us and blinds us, we can no longer tell it's there; we start to think it's normal. The blind mole throws his hills of dirt toward heaven, to tell the gods the earth is filled with man's evil, and the worm dies because of it. The world is full of evil men like you, but kings are supposed to be gods on earth! When kings are corrupt, they can twist the law to conform to their evil desires (and when a god makes a mistake, who would dare to tell him?). You know your actions are wrong, and the fact that you know and still keep on doing it makes it even worse. By the love everyone has for their own mother, please don't kill me for what I've said!
May God make you prosperous in your good cause! Be swift like lightning in the fight, and let your blows fall like thunder on your evil enemy. Use your youthful strength: be brave and survive.
Poor dear, your face has been abused by so many tears.
I know you well. How are you, my good fellow?
Youre too angry.
You too. This feels familiar.
But I dont remember that.
He's like a drowned man, a fool, and a madman. The first drink makes him a fool, the second makes him a madman, and the third drowns him.
You speak of Othello. Here I am.
I can't speak to that. Now come on, remember your promise.
Surrey, you lie.
Once you kill Prospero.
This jest has such a thin sole, and is unique only because of its lameness.
What is ailing my niece, that she reacts so strongly to her brother's death? I'm now sure that caring too much is bad for one's health.
We thank you both: yet one merely flatters us, since you come to accuse one another of high treason. Cousin of Hereford, what is your accusation against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
Then you should grow lots of gillyvors and stop calling them "bastards."
Perfect timing, let him in! I love ballads more than I should: happy ones, sad ones, and even happy ones sung sadly.
Why, then, I will. Goodbye, old Gaunt. You go to Coventry to see our cousin Hereford and that evil Mowbray fight: oh, may Hereford's spear avenge my husband by stabbing Mowbray! Or, if he's unlucky enough to miss, I hope Mowbray's sins sit so heavy in his heart that his horse's back breaks and throws its rider to the ground, so that he becomes my cousin Hereford's wretched prisoner. Goodbye, old Gaunt: your dead brother's wife must end her life with grief, her only companion.
Norfolk, we must have a few swings of the sword, ha, must we not?
I was your poor and loyal servant.
You misguided subjects, the great King of KingsGodhas said in his Ten Commandments that "you shall not murder." Will you then disobey God's commandment just to obey a man's? Beware, for God holds vengeance in his hand, waiting to smite those who break his laws.
Ah, there's the problem.
Good Miss Accost-her, I look forward to knowing you better.
[So only LUCENTIO can hear] You're right, master. Let's keep quiet and enjoy the sight.
Well then, gentlemen, shall we go see the walls of this fort?
You talk like a dog and you're going to die like a dog. Don't even answer me, I'm leaving.
Then heaven have mercy on me!
Sir Valentine, I don't care about her. I think a man would be foolish to put his body in danger for a girl that doesn't love him. I don't call her mine, and therefore she is yours.
I wish I knew what was in your heart.
If you are the lady of the house, then you certainly have stolen from yourself, because what's yours to give away is not yours to keep for yourself. But this isn't what I was sent to say. I'll go on with my speech praising you, and then I'll get to the heart of my message.
Hey, who's there?
He smiled and said, "All the better for us."
Have you come down to this island from heaven?
Whenever you want, since you will insist on it.
Would you ever cheat on your husband, for all the world?
Sweetheart, I hate to correct your over-exaggerationsplease forgive me for pointing them out. Though you've disguised yourself as a shepherd, you're still the prince of our country and I'm only a poor peasant girl playing dress-up. If it weren't the kind of party where everyone will be looking a little silly, I'd be embarrassed for you to be dressed the way you are, and I could hardly look in a mirror.
I've never seen a woman love a man as much as she loves you.
Farewell! Ill take every opportunity to send my love to you.
A harsh sentence, my most sovereign liege, and unfair from your highness' mouth: I deserved a better reward from you than to be cast out of my home and into the street. I must no longer speak the language I have learned these forty years, my native English, and my tongue is now no more use to me than an unstringed violin, a harp left in a case, or an instrument put in the hands of one who doesn't know how to play it. You have imprisoned my tongue in my mouth, locked it up behind my teeth and lips, and now I can no longer speak. Dull emotionless ignorance is my jailer. I am too old to be a student now: what is your sentence then but silencing me to death by stopping my tongue from speaking its native language?
If God doesnt prevent me from going, I plan to be there.
Oh, sir, I won't be so cruel. I'll give out lists of my beauty. I'll make a detailed inventory, with every part labeled and added to my will. For exampleitem: two lips, moderately red. Item: two grey eyes, with lids attached. Item: one neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you only sent here to praise my beauty?
Now heres something.
Oh Lord, theyre fighting! Ill go call the watch.
Who have you ever known that was well-liked without any means at all?
What a noble spirit!
My servant Cesario?
Even though I have killed men while serving in war, still my conscience forbids me from committing any premeditated murder. I lack the evil disposition that would sometimes serve my purpose. Nine or ten times I've thought about just stabbing him right under the ribs.
Youre going to speak well of the man who killed your cousin?
Tell me, tell me, what did the citizens say?
These are old sayings to make fools laugh in the bars. What saying do you have for a woman that's both ugly and foolish?
And if you won't undo what you have donethat is, if you don't want to kill the man whose life you savedthen you won't come with me. Say goodbye at once. My heart is full of affection for you, and I'm feeling so effeminate that I'm about to cry. My destination is Duke Orsino's court. Farewell.
Oh, you villain!
Do you think so, spirit?
Weeping like this will make you feel the loss, but wont help you feel the friend youve lost.
[Singing] She loves another manWho's that shouting?
Worse and worse, ma'am. She's preached some sermon to Lord Lysimachus.
Otherwise I would tell himand really I should, that when all these gifts are spent on others, which he has proven capable of doing, he'd have all his debts erased. It is sad that generosity is not more vigilant, that way man might never lack for having such a giving spirit.
Do some work, then.
Why, sir?
Yes, I'll go with you.
Alas, dearest Cassio, my pleading on your behalf isn't working right now. My husband is not acting like himself. If his physical appearance were as transformed as his inner character is now, I wouldn't even recognize him. So help me God, I have spoken up for you as best I could and he has looked down on me because of it. You must be patient for a while. I will do what I can, and I will even do more than I would dare do for myself. Let that be enough for you.
In her room, preaching to her about self-control. He rants and rails and swears so much that she, poor soul, doesn't know which way to stand, look, or speak, so she just sits like someone who's woken up from a dream. But go, go, he's coming!
We were two kids who lived like there was no tomorrow, and thought we'd be boys forever.
The sort of woman to do what?
I haven't said anything wrong.
[To himself] I'm not naturally an honest man, but sometimes I'm honest by accident. I need to take off this traveling salesman disguise. [AUTOLYCUS takes off his fake beard and speaks to the shepherds] Hello, peasants! Where are you going?
What are you all talking about? [To MAMILLIUS] Come here, Mamillius, I'm ready to deal with you again. Come on, come sit by me and tell me a story.
No? Is that what you're telling me, friend? Where are you from?
But not to bury it in a grave in order to start a new love.
Over here! For heaven's sake, help me!
Can we see the jewels?
Then let him thank me, who helped him get there. He's better suited for heaven than for earth.
He ordered me to murder you.
This is the son of Tamora and a corrupt Moor, who was responsible for plotting all these crimes. The villain is a prisoner in Titus's house; we've kept him to alive to prove it. Now you see how many reasons Titus had to take revengethese crimes against him were unspeakable, past endurance, more than any living man could bear. Now that you've heard the truth, what do you say, Romans? Have we done anything we shouldn't have? If we have, tell us so, and the poor remains of the Andronici family will throw ourselves off the walls of our house, hand in hand, and crack our skulls on the stones below. Speak, Romans, speak: if that's what you want us to do, Lucius and I will fall hand in hand.
Honorable Timon, it has pleased the gods to remember the times of my father and to call him to a long peace in death. He is now happily gone and has left me rich. Virtue has thus dictated, then, that I honor your generosity. I return all of that money you lent me, and double the amount in thanks and service to you, who helped free me.
Didn't the painter do a good job?
Listen, Tranio! It sounds like Minerva speaking .
May God bless your Grace with health and happy days.
See, brother, see; look how she's pointing to particular passages.
Now, by God, Im so upset that Im shaking. That rotten scoundrel!
Goodbye, sister; I must go to Coventry: I wish us both good fortune!
Then may God send you old age and senility, that you might become a better fool! Sir Toby would bet a fortune that I'm not a clever man, but he wouldn't bet two cents that you're not a fool.
If I were taken by a hungry lion, I would rather have been the beast's breakfast than have the false Proteus rescue me. Oh, Heaven may be the judge of how much I love Valentine, whose life's as precious to me as my soul! And I hate the false, lying Proteus the mostmore than words can express. Therefore, leave. Don't pursue me anymore.
I don't have to do that. He knows how attentive you are.
For God's sake, someone bring me a mug of cheap beer.
I will do this, if you give me the chance.
If you're against him marrying, you're not thinking realistically about our country or the fact that Leontes needs an heir to his royal name. Consider what will happen if he dies without an heirthe kingdom will descend into warfare. We should thank God Hermione is in heaven now. Only good could come of a new queen: companionship for Leontes and the possibility of future princes and princesses.
Of course, that he misses his son is a good excuse. If he says that, we'll let him go. And if he swears that, we'll not only let him go, we'll chase him out the door with frying pans! Despite that, I'll still beg your royal self to stay another week. When my husband goes to Bohemia I'll give him permission to stay there a month past the agreed-upon departure dateand, Leontes, you know I love you not one bit less than any woman loves her husband. [To POLIXENES] Will you stay?
Get a pillow for his head. Let's all leave him.Well, friends, if all this is true, I'll never forget you.
She's good at everything. And, just between you and me: if Doricles does marry her, she'll bring him more than he ever dreamed of.
The noble duke has been too much abused.
How could I keep my honor and  give him what I have already given to you?
Then here is a petition for you. And when you come to him, you must first kneel, then kiss his foot, then give him your pigeons, and then wait for your reward. I'll be close by, sir; make sure you do it well.
Stephano!
Why, uncle, you have many years to live.
No, boy.
Yet he looks like a king: see, his eye, as bright as the eagle's, shoots majestic glances. Oh, it would be a pity if any harm should come to something so fair!
Yes, Apemantus.
What terror has occurred to result in all this startling noise?
[Offstage] Madam!
How can you preach about God's laws to us when you have broken them to such an extreme degree?
Were talking here in public. Either lets go somewhere private and calmly discuss your complaints, or else just go our separates ways. Here, everybody can see us.
Mens eyes were made to see. Let them watch. I wont move for anyone.
And he still is, or was very recently at least. I only left here a month ago, and at that time there was a popular rumoras, you know, people gossip about the nobilitythat he was courting the fair Olivia.
That's true, most noble sir. The Duke is in a council meeting, and I am sure you have also been sent for.
But as for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot, they'll be destroyed with the rest of the plotters. Good uncle, help us send an army to Oxford, or wherever the traitors are: they won't live much longer if I can help it, once we find them. Uncle, goodbye, and cousin too; your mother has begged well for you, so be loyal going forward.
Ha, ha! Keep time: sweet music is sour when it doesn't stay on beat! This is true as well in the music of men's lives. But while here I have a good enough ear to notice when time is broken in a song, when I was king I couldn't hear my own time break. I wasted time, and now time wastes me.  For now time itself could tell the time by me: my thoughts are minutes, my eyes are the face of the clock, and the finger that wipes the tears from them is the hand that tells us the time. My groans are like the chimes that ring on the hour; so my sighs and tears and groans show minutes, times, and hours, like a clock. But actually, Bolingbroke is in charge of my time; I'm just his Jack of the clock. The music will make me go mad; stop it now. For though it's helped madmen to be sane again, it seems it will make sane men mad. And yet I bless the person who plays the music, since that's a sign of love; and not many people in this hateful world love me.
I'm tougher than you give me credit for!
Why were you curious, Iago?
Please, husband, don't be so upset. The meat was fine, if you would have accepted it.
The things that we prepared for the wedding now will be used instead for the funeral. Our musical instruments will be exchanged for mourning bells. Our wedding banquet will be a sad burial feast instead. Our celebratory hymns will change to sad funeral dirges. Our bridal flowers will cover a buried corpse. Everything will be used for the opposite purpose than we expected.
Yes, madam, because he lives outside the reach of my hands. I wish that I was the only one who could avenge my cousins death!
Would your Honor like to try this dried fruit?
[Whispering] Oh quiet, quiet, quiet! Now, now.
Yes, but that still isn't enough.
Your lordship always makes him grateful.
What? Get this ridiculous woman out of here. [To ANTIGONUS] Antigonus, I told you not to let her get to me. I knew she would.
I've heard of this guy, sir, and that he has a very beautiful daughter. By all reports, she's far beyond what you'd expect from such circumstances.
Thank you, your Grace. The gift has made me happy. I now ask youfor your daughter's saketo do me one more favor.
Isnt this Stephano, my drunken butler?
Amen to that, oh heavenly powers! I can't speak enough about how happy I am. It's too much joy. [He kisses DESDEMONA] And let this, and this, be the only quarrels we have.
Yes, my lord?
You've honored us with this feast,  Simonides.
Then your beloved should be younger than you are, or you won't be able to maintain your feelings for her. Women are like roses, whose beauty is greatest in the same hour that they fall from the stem and decay.
Oh, treacherous villains! [To LODOVICO and GRATIANO] Who are you over there? Come here and give some help.
She says Desdemona is faithful, but the stupidest girl could say as much. Desdemona is a sneaky whore, a locked closet full of villainous secrets. And the whole time she'll kneel and pray like a good woman. I have seen her do it.
Princes and noble lords, how can I respond to this villain? Will I dishonor myself by getting angry at him, descending to his level? But I must do that, or have my honor soiled by his lies. [Throws down his gage] This is my gage, which will seal your death sentence and send you to hell: I call you a liar, and will prove it by defeating you in battle, although your blood isnt noble enough to stain my sword.
Thats a certain truth.
You seem to be a good man in both behavior and appearance, captain, and even though nature often makes beautiful people corrupt on the inside, I believe that you have a noble mind to fit your good looks and manners. Pleaseand I'll pay you well for thishelp me conceal my identity, and find me the disguise that will suit my intentions. I want to serve this duke. You will present me to him as a eunuch. It will be worth your trouble, for I can sing and speak well, and he will surely consider me for his service. What might happen after that, only time will tell. You must only match my wit with your silence and discretion.
Oh, take her home, mistress, take her home. We'll get rid of all this shyness with a little practice.
Good morning, Catesby. You're up early. What's the news in our unsteady kingdom?
You cannot possibly have forgotten me, but there is no other reason you would deny me after I have lowered myself to beg for something you would grant any other man. It hurts me to the very core.
How have you divided yourself in two? These two people are as identical as two halves of an apple. Which is Sebastian?
My words are dull. Oh, give them life with yours!
That's not wrong. But wait for a bit. Will you step back and hide?
I smell it too.
And as for Pericles, what can he say? We cried at her funeral, and we mourn now. The monument to her is almost finished. The epitaph on it proclaims how great she was in gold letters. We've done all the right things, and have spared no expense.
Look, here comes a poet and a painter. I hope you catch the plague of their company! For fear of catching it I'll leave now. I'll see you again when I have nothing better to do.
Set it down; let's look at it.
Either, madam.
Sir, it can't be. I threw her overboard with my own hands.
Yes, all of them lost their heads at Bristol.
Even if my clothes were better I would still rush in like thisBut where is Kate? Where is my love? How is my father-in-law? Gentlemen, you seem to be frowning. Why is this fine gathering of people all staring, as if at something strangea comet or some unnatural phenomenon?
Some other place would be better.
You might as well die, because the day you can't learn is the day you are basically hanged.[Gesturing with the letters] This one is to Lord Timon, and this one is to Alcibiades. You were born a bastard, and now you'll die a whore.
Well don't try to face off with me. You have braved many men, but don't try to brave me. I tell you, I asked your master to cut out the gown, but I didn't ask him to cut it to pieces. Therefore, you're a liar.
Up.
[To SEBASTIAN] Can this be, sir, that we meet again? Take that.
What, you don't believe me?
Howdy-hey!
Find a way to do it, and Ill find the man we need to help you. But now Ill tell you some joyful news, girl.
Oh, this learning, what an excellent thing it is!
In fact, Ill never be satisfied with Romeo until I see him...dead is the way my poor heart feels when I think of my poor cousin. Madam, if you could only find a man with poison, Id mix it myself so that Romeo would, once dosed with it, sleep quietly. Oh, I hate to hear his name and not be able to go after him! How Id like to take my love for my cousin and take it out on the body of the man who killed him!
Don't scold me. I have something for you.
I will receive it with great thanks.
My lady Olivia's a trickster, we are clever plotters, Malvolio's a loose woman, and [singing] We are three merry men. Aren't we related? I'm Olivia's uncle, right? Well la-dee-da! "Lady!" [singing]There lived a man in Babylon, lady, lady!
Don't doubt me, for
You crazy woman, what are you doing here? Shall your old breasts wean another traitor?
Christ, sir, you're the type of man who would refuse to serve God if the devil told you to! We've come here to do you a favor, and you're ignoring us just because you think we're no good. You're letting your daughter mate with a Barbary horse. Your grandchildren will neigh to you. You'll have ponies and colts for descendants.
Some solemn music is the best for comforting and curing restless minds, which right now are uselessburning with passions inside your skulls. All of you, stand there. You are under my spell.[To GONZALO] Good Gonzalo, you honorable man, I sympathize with what your crying eyes show that you are feeling, and my eyes cry too.[To himself] The spell is quickly dissipating, and like dawn sneaking up on the night and melting the darkness, their normal senses begin to creep up past the daze that right now clouds their minds. [To GONZALO] Oh, good Gonzalomy true savior and a loyal lord to the king you followIll reward everything you've done, both with words and actions.[To ALONSO] Alonso, you treated both my daughter and me cruelly, and your brother helped you do it.[To SEBASTIAN] Youre being punished for it now, Sebastian.[To ANTONIO] My brother, my flesh and blood, you followed your ambition and in so doing lost your goodness and compassion. It is because of you that Sebastian's guilty conscience is so strong, because you would have killed your king with him. But I forgive you, even though you are a monster.[To himself] Their minds are starting to return to normal, and soon their reason will emerge from where it is now muddied by confusion. Not one of them would recognize me yet.[To ARIEL] Ariel, get me the hat and sword from my hut. Ill take off the magician's robes Im wearing, and put on the clothes I used to wear in Milan. Quickly, spirit. Not long from now, you will be free.
Yes, as great and as recent. And, to make the loss more profound, I have much less to comfort me than you do, because I lost my daughter.
[To himself] Well said, Mr. Priest.
Oh no, that was my lady's voice.
Honorable senators, I'm so used to the difficult, cruel war that it's as comfortable to me as a soft down bed. I am naturally eager to take on difficult challenges, and I will undertake this mission against the Ottomites. As I am obeying you, I humbly ask for appropriate arrangements for my wife. She should have a place to live that is worthy of her nobility, as well as suitable company.
[Mimicking TRINCULO's voice] You lie.
And because of that your man should be too, Timon. His honesty ought to reward him in and of itself. But it should not earn him my daughter too.
Nothing, just an empty box, which Timon asked that I beg you fill with some money. He could really use fifty talents, and thinks you would be kind enough to lend him that money. He thinks without a doubt you will assist him.
[To himself] Youve put on a great show of being a harpy, my Ariel. The performance had grace, and yet also a fierce consuming power. You followed my instructions and left out nothing that I asked you to say. With a unique attention to detail, even my less powerful servants have performed their different roles with excellent realism. My magic spells are working, and my enemies are all caught up in their bewilderment. They are now under my control, and I'll leave them stuck here in their confusion while I visit young Ferdinandwhom they think has drownedand the darling girl both he and I love.
Cant anyone tell me where my wasteful son has gone? I havent seen him for three months; if we have a plague, its him. I wish we could find himask around at London, among the taverns, for they say he spends his time there with the sort of companions who rob people in the streets, while he, young, stupid, and effeminate boy, spends my money supporting that crew.
What does she say about my face?
What else can we do? The girls we have are so pitiful, a strong wind would blow them all to pieces.
Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
What do you say?
No, my good lord; let's fight with gentle words, and wait it out until our friends can come to our aid with their swords.
I'm the worst of all music's students, sir.
Sir Baptista, it's good to see you.
Good job keeping up this trick of yoursseriously. No, I don't know you, and my lady didn't send me to fetch you, and she doesn't want you to speak with her, and your name is not Master Cesario, and this isn't my nose, either. Nothing is what it is.
Widow! To hell with that! Why is he calling her a widow? Widow Didoha!
It's death for anyone from Mantua to come to Padua. Don't you know why? The Duke of Padua proclaimed it openly. There's a private quarrel between him and your duke, and all the ships from Mantua are being impounded in Venice. It's amazing that you didn't know, but I guess you just arrived. Otherwise you would have heard it proclaimed all around town.
Please, foolish jester, leave me alone. Here's some money for you. [Giving money] If you stay longer, I'll give you something worse.
Here is his cave. We come in peace and friendship! Timon! Timon! Come out and speak to two friends. The Athenians send their best to you in two honored senators. Speak to them, Timon.
"Moved," indeed. Then let whoever moved you here come and remove you. I could tell at once that you were a moveable.
Lords, you who are here under arrest, put up your bail for your trial days. I owe nothing to your love, and will hardly turn to you for help when I need it.
Oh, it breaks my heart to think about how sad it must make you to be reminded of these events that I dont remember! Please, though, continue.
Sir, arent you my father?
[Coming forward out of hiding] How should I murder him, Iago?
Sit down, sweet niece: brother, sit down by me. May Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury inspire me, so that I can find some way to expose the criminal! My lord, look; look at this, Lavinia. This is a plain plot of sand; if I take this stick, I can write my name without any hands at all. If you can, do what I did.
This wind youre talking about is blowing us off course. Dinner is already over. Were going to get there too late.
Tell her to come here. Go.
Here he comes. If you don't mind, please leave us alone. Ill make him either tell me whats wrong, or else he'll just decline to tell me over and over again.
So what if I don't? Indeed, I don'tbut I know you're religious and have a thing called "conscience," and I've seen you perform twenty popish rituals and ceremonies, which you're always careful to observe. So that's why I make you swear, since I know that an idiot treats a toy like a god and keeps the promise he swears by that god. So you will swear by that godwhatever god it is that you worshipto save my boy, take care of him, and raise him, or else I won't tell you anything.
Something's wrong. That cry is very serious.
I say it is the moon.
[As LUCENTIO] Sir, I won't be stingy. On that note, let's spend this afternoon drinking toasts to our beloved's health. We'll be like opposing lawyers in a case, who fight viciously in court, but outside of it eat and drink as friends.
My lord, what do you want?
No I am not, on my word as a good Christian.
But, uncle, were being dishonored.
Foul devil, for God's sake, go away and leave us alone. You've made the pleasant earth into your hell, filling it with cursing cries and deep laments. If you enjoy looking at your horrible deeds, then behold this example of your butchery.
[To VINCENTIO] Good morning, gentle mistress, where are you off to?Tell me, sweet Kate, and be honest, have you ever seen a prettier, healthier-looking young lady? See how the shades of white and red do battle with each other in her cheeks! And what stars in heaven sparkle with as much beauty as the two eyes in that heavenly face?Fair lovely maid, once more I say good day to you.Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
Then it's refusing to shine. For according to this almanac, it should have risen in the east an hour ago. It will be a dark day for somebody today. Hey, Ratcliffe!
Get up, please. Get up. Sit down. I'm glad you're not a flatterer. Kings shouldn't be surrounded by men who make excuses for their faults! You're a wise counsellor and servant fit for a prince; by your wisdom, you've made me your servant, ready to do your will. What should I do?
[Speaking to Lords outside] Don't let anyone come in here. [To himself] Why am I so changed? Why am I sad, downcast, and melancholy every hour of every day? Neither a beautiful day nor a quiet night (which should be where I put my worries to rest) can give me peace. Even when I'm surrounded by things I should enjoy, I can't get rid of this fear of danger waiting for me at Antiochbut there's no way the king could reach me here! And yet, nothing can cheer me up, not even the reality of distance. That's the way the mind works: once we start worrying about something, it only gets worse and worse, until we convince ourselves that the danger is real. Just like that, my fear of Antiochus, who is a much more powerful king than I amand can put his desires into actionhas been blown out of proportion. Even though I haven't said a word, he'll assume I've told his secret. And it won't help for me to say I'm loyal to him, if he's already decided I'm not. If he's determined to keep his secret under wraps, all he has to do is kill me. He'll infiltrate my country with his armies, wage war, and overthrow the government. He'll punish my subjects, too, even though they never did anything to hurt him. I'm more worried about them than I am about myself; I'm just the treetops that protect the roots by which the people grow, and help defend them. It's concern for them that makes my body sick and my soul tired with wanting to punish Antiochus before he punishes us.
Ha!
There's a sickness affecting some of us, but I don't know what to call the disease. And, even though you're well, you're the one who's contagious.
Your mother is on her way to your bedroom. Day has arrived. Be careful. Watch out.
You've already wronged that with your past actions. I myself have many tears left to cry in the future because of your past crimes. The children whose fathers you slaughtered are still alive, and they will grow up without guidance, unfortunate in their adulthood. The parents whose children you butchered are still alive too, old barren plants who will be miserable in their old age. Don't swear by the future, for with your past you've already ruined it.
You do me wrong, Sir Gremio. Let me continue.I am a gentleman of Verona, sir, who has heard of your daughter's beauty and wit, her friendliness and bashful modesty, her wondrous talents and mild behavior. I have now boldly come as a guest to your house to try and see for myself all the things I've heard reported. And, to pay the price of my admission to your hospitality, I here present you with a servant of mine.
Five thousand drops should cover.[To the other servants] What about all your receipts?
Once more, Cesario, go visit that supremely cruel woman. Tell her that my love is more noble than anything else in the world, and has nothing to do with her property or the riches she has inherited. Tell her that the fortune I value the most is her gem-like beauty, which is priceless and attracts my helpless soul.
An honor! If I werent the only nurse youve had, Id say youd sucked wisdom from the breast that fed you.
I thank your Honor.
Why do you scream and cry like that? What's that bundle in your arms?
It's a bet! Let's do it.
[To CAMILLO] She's the prettiest peasant girl I've ever seen. Everything she does is graceful. She's too noble for this place.
Sir, she hasn't been broken in yet; you'll need to work hard to make her obey. [To BOULT and PANDAR] Come on, we'll leave the two of them together. Go on, now.
Hey, has anyone seen Cesario?
It looks excellent. It hangs like flax waiting to be spun. And I hope to see some hussy take it between her legs and spin it off with a venereal disease.
What do you mean?
He thinksactually, he swears as confidently as if he saw you do it or told you to do it himselfthat you're having a secret affair with Hermione.
Widow Dido, did you say? I'd have to look into that. Dido was from Carthage, not Tunis.
I'll tell the king everything, every word. And I'll tell him about Florizel's tricks, too. He hasn't been very truthful to his father or to me, considering he was about to make me a king's brother-in-law.
What was your dream, my lord? Please tell me.
Goodbye, my Desdemona. I'll come see you soon.
[Singing drunkenly] Goodbye, master! Goodbye, goodbye.
Catch your breath, please. We can tell you've come in a rush.
[Knocking] My lord, my lord.
That is not so good, now.
You're welcome here, sir, and he is too, for your sake. But as for my daughter Katherine, this much I know: she won't meet your expectationsand that's a pity for me.
Welcome to your room here in London, sweet prince.
Calm yourself. These are friendsRatcliffe and Lovell.
What's that, mistress?
That's the man, sir. Do you know him?
Whoever he is that has tricked your daughter in this foul way and robbed you of her, you will get to punish him according  whatever your own interpretation is of the law books, which have the power of the death penalty. Yes, even if it turns out to be my own son who is the perpetrator.
You base men, set down the corpse or, I swear by Saint Paul, I'll make corpses out of you.
So, Ill go to Titus dressed in this strange costume, and tell him I am Revenge, sent from below to help him right his terrible wrongs. Ill knock at the door to his studywhich is where he spends most of his time, they say, plotting ways to take revengeand tell him Revenge has come to help him destroy his enemies.
And that makes me her father too. But oh, how strange it is that I have to ask my child to forgive me!
Where?
Yes, you will, and you'll taste all different kinds of gentlemen. You'll do well! You'll have all sorts. What? Why are you covering your ears?
Famous Lucius, I went ahead of the army to see a ruined monastery, and as I looked at the building, I heard a baby cry underneath a wall. I followed the noise to its source, and heard someone shushing the baby by saying, "Be quiet, brown slave, half me and half your mother! The color of your skin betrayed who your father was; if nature had made you look like your mother, you might have been an emperor. But when the bull and cow are both milk-white, they don't breed a coal-black calf. Be quiet, villain, be quiet!"so he said to the baby"Since I have to take you to a trustworthy Goth, who, when he knows that you're the empress's child, will take good care of you for your mother's sake." When I heard this, I rushed at him with my weapon drawn, took him prisoner, and bought him here to do with as you see fit.
Yesnonoyes: for I must be nothing, therefore no no, and I must surrender to you. Now watch how I will undo myself. I give this heavy weight from my head, this unwieldy scepter from my hand, and the pride of a kings power from my heart; with my own tears I wash away my balm, with my own hands I give away my crown, with my own tongue say that Im not king, with my own breath release everyone from allegiance to me. I give up all pomp and majesty and all the revenue from my lands; I take back all my acts, decrees, and statutes: God pardon all the oaths everyone breaks to me! God keep all the vows they swear to you! Make me, that has nothing, not be sad about anything; and you be happy all the time, since you have everything you wanted! Long may you live to sit in Richards seat; and may Richard soon lie in a pit in the ground! God save King Harry, unkinged Richard says, and send him many years of sunshine days! What else do I have to do?
What? Is this true?
It is always that time.
The rest of us will meet here again at nine in the morning. Othello, leave an officer behind here, and later he can bring you our instructions, and anything else you feel you need.
I am very glad to see you, sir. Welcome to Cyprus.
Alas, your fear is so great that it makes you disguise your true identity. But don't be afraid, Cesario. Reach out and accept your good fortune. Be the person you know you are, and then you will be as powerful as the person you fear.
Well, I'll tell you. This is Pentapolis, and our king is the good Simonides.
Thaliard, you're my trusted servant, and I need you to do something for me under the utmost secrecy. You'll be rewarded for your service.[He pulls out a bottle of poison and a bag of gold] Look, Thaliard, here's poison, and here's gold. I hate Pericles, Prince of Tyre, and I want you to kill him. Don't ask me whyit's because I said so. Understand?
What's the matter?
Here is a miracle, if we're speaking of miracles.
[To the PRINCE] What, are you going to the Tower, my lord?
You have a daughter called Elizabeth, who is virtuous and beautiful, royal and gracious.
This wont make him angry. It would anger him if I conjured a strange spirit into Rosaline's room for her to have sex with. That would really anger him. But what Im saying is fair and honest. Im just saying the name of his love in order to call him out from the darkness.
You lying slave, who responds only to whipping and not to kindness! Though you are a piece of dirt, I treated you kindly and humanely. I even let you live in my own shack, until you tried to rape my daughter.
Don't upset yourself, or waste your breath: it's no use giving him advice.
Say that she will be a high and mighty queen.
The blend of enforced restraint with my burning rage is making me tremble. Ill leave. But Ill make Romeo regret this prank, which at the moment seems to him like such great fun.
Yes, my lord. Shell be a perfect fit for your bed, and shell bear you some excellent children.
I would bet that Desdemona is honest, my lord. I'd bet my soul on it. If you think otherwise, throw away this suspicionit is poisoning your heart. If any wretch has put the idea in your head, may God curse him the way he cursed the snake. If Desdemona is not honest, chaste, and true, then no woman is, and no man is happy with his wife.
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
What a courteous explanation.
Do you think so?
Chop off his head. We'll come up with something. And when I am king, you will have the earldom of Herefordand all the wealth and possessions that go with itwhich my brother, King Edward, used to own.
My liege, old Gaunt sends greetings to your majesty.
All the better for God, who has him now.
What, will my daughter turn out to be a good musician?
And on my side, if I die before she does, as her widow's inheritance she'll get all my lands and the rent from my property. Let's have contracts drawn up between us, so both of us will be sure to keep up our end of the agreement.
But I didn't see anything wrong then, and I heard every syllable they uttered to each other.
Go, walk down the path from which you'll never return. Stupid, plain Clarence, I love you so much that I'll soon send your soul to heavenif heaven will accept any presents from me. But who's this coming? The newly released Hastings?
[To himself, indicating GREMIO] What a handsome young man! A real heartbreaker.
What is this noise? Is she not dead? Not quite dead yet? I may be cruel, but I am merciful too: I don't want you to die slowly and painfully. So here.
[Giving money to the APOTHECARY] There is your gold. Money is a worse poison to men's souls, and commits more murders in this awful world than these poor medicines you aren't permitted to sell. I'm selling you poison; you haven't sold me any. Goodbye. Buy yourself some food, and put on some weight.
Well, go to bed and sleep.
Shame on you, daughter! When your mother was alive, she was a jack-of-all-trades on the day of the festival. She welcomed everyone, served everyone, sang and dancedshe was at one end of the table, then the other, serving this man and that man, sweating from working so hard and drinking all the while. Meanwhile, you're relaxing as if you were a guest and not the host! [He gestures toward POLIXENES and CAMILLO] Please welcome these strangers. I hope we can get to know them better. All right, stop blushing and introduce yourself; you're the queen of the feast. Come on, and welcome everyone to the sheep-shearing so that we can start enjoying ourselves.
And the fourth?
[To himself] Should I listen longer, or respond now to these words?
I will unlock the meaning for you. Notice how people of all types and temperaments, whether smooth-talking and self-interested or serious and truthful, offer their services to Lord Timon. His immense wealth and his kind and gracious nature overwhelm people, and buy him the approval of all sorts of people eager to love and attend him, from the flatterer whose face mirrors the wishes of his counterpart, to Apemantus, who loves nothing more than hating himself. Even he bows down on his knees to Timon, and leaves peacefully after receiving Timon's approval.
They have indeed made peace with him, my lord.
Why, thats my dainty Ariel singing. I will miss you, but I will still give you your freedom. Yes, yes, yes. Go to the kings ship, remaining invisible as you are right now. There youll find the sailors asleep below deck. The Master and Boatswain will be awake. Lead them here immediately, please.
Oh, a representative of Lucius! Are you here to see Timon as well?
That's a meager answer. And I can tell you where you got that saying about not being afraid of anything.
Boatswain!
Lead on.
I'll follow you.
I had a Richard too, my husband, and you killed him. I had a Rutland too, and you helped to kill him.
I never even considered that there might be more to know.
Sir Gratiano, is that you? I beg your pardon. This bloody incident has made it so that I couldn't treat you with proper manners.
I think hell carry this island home in his pocket and give it to his son as an apple.
Is your other mouth calling my name? Save me, save me! This is a devil, not a monster. I'm getting away from him. I'd be a fool to get involved with the devil.
I'm serious; he can't know. Let's sign the contract.
What, right in front of me?Bianca, go inside.
Why?
You are a villain, Capulet! [LADY MONTAGUE grabs his arm] Let go of me. Dont stop me.
Its good when there is joy during such sad times. Whats the news, please?
I'm sorry, my lord, they wouldn't let me enter, but Olivia's handmaid gave me this answer: the outside world won't see Olivia's face for the next seven years. She'll wear a veil like a nun, and once a day she'll water her room with her tears. All of this is to preserve her love for her dead brother, whose memory she wants to keep fresh forever.
Of course, sir.
Tell me, where's Polixenes?
If anyone fails to thank you, or think grateful thoughts toward youwhether it's our wives, children, or ourselvesmay they be cursed by heaven and punished by men! Until the day someone denies you (which day we hope will never come) you're very welcome here in our town and with us.
If I had a mirror, I would.
Well, they're gone. Now about my daughter's letter . . . [He looks at a letter] She says here that she wants to marry the stranger knight, or she'll never see the light of day again. That's fine, missy; your choice is the same as mine. I really like that. It's funny how set she is in it; she doesn't care whether or not I dislike it! Well, I'm happy with her choice, but I'll pretend I'm not. Shh! Here he comes! I'll have to pretend it.
Truly, but you must. Imagine a ladywho probably exists somewherewho loves you just as passionately as you love Olivia. But you cannot love her, and you tell her so. Doesn't she have to accept your answer then?
Hello, sir.
Good morning, sir.
I'd second your wish, boy, if it meant that the next wish gave Baptista's youngest daughter to Lucentio. But for your master's sake, boy, not mine, I advise you to be discreet in the company of others. When we're alone, then I'm Tranio. But everywhere else, I'm your master Lucentio.
I hope you live long and painful lives, you smooth-talking parasites, you wolves in sheeps' clothing, you weak fools of fortune, fake friends, worthless workers! You'll die soon enough! May the worst disease cover you all over in scabs! What, are you leaving? Come now, everyone, take your medicine first! Come on, I'll give you money and ask for nothing back!
Nowhere yet, but since this was all unplanned, we're flying by the seat of our pants here.
He'll be dead, and so he won't see anything to be afraid of.
Oh, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham!
Then my love is humble. I have no desire to see a more handsome man than this one.
The king.
Who doesn't know where a wasp wears its stinger? In its tail.
A gentleman? What gentleman?
Oh, damned Iago! You inhuman dog!
Well, I should hope so. I'm not such a fool that I can't keep my hand dry. But what's the joke?
Shes ready to go, but not to return.
Here's my hand, Hastings. I will forget all our past hatred for each other, and may we both prosper in the future.
There is no woman strong enough to withstand the passion of love that's in my heart. No woman's heart is big enough to hold so much emotion. Women can't carry too much. Alas, love for them is just a shallow appetitea matter of taste, not a matter of the heart. If they try to eat too much, they get sick, but my love is as insatiable as the sea, and can swallow just as much as the ocean. Don't compare my love for Olivia to any love a woman could have for me.
Peace would be great, if that's what he's here for. If it's war he wants, there's nothing we can do about it.
I wish I were, so I could have some power to take revenge and kill you.
I know what to do. I'll go call the constable.
Not tonight, good Iago. I'm not a very good drinker. I wish it was customary to celebrate in some other way.
Her honor is part of her inner essence that can't be seen. Often people have an honorable reputation but aren't really honorable. But as for the handkerchief
You have convinced me. I pardon them, and I pardon you. Make arrangements for them in accordance with what they deserve. Come, let's go. We will bring this all to an end with festivities, joy, and a marvelous celebration.
I stretched it for that word fat. Add that to the goose, and it makes you a fat goose.
Please, sir, don't refuse the opportunity to sleep. Sleep rarely comes to people who are grieving. When it does come, it gives comfort.
Immediately?
How, my clever York? Let me hear your comeback.
He did, from the very beginning. Why do you ask?
Is this true?
You have a thing for me? It is a common thing. . .
Clear away the stools, sideboards, and plates. My friend, save me a piece of marzipan, and if you love me, have the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan!
[Whispering] And see how eagerly he goes to eat it!
You should think this through . . .
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for coming. I know you expected to dine with me today, and you've prepared a feast to celebrate the wedding, but it so happens that I've been called away to urgent business. So I must say goodbye.
My kind Antonio, the only answer I can give you is thanks, and thanks, and infinite thanks. Often such good deeds are only rewarded with cheap words, but if I had any wealth I would strengthen my gratitude with money. Now what should we do? Should we go see the monuments of this town?
And enter our ears like trumpeters celebrating at the gates.
Yes, and I will be.
The voice of Thaisa, who's dead!
Is this what you call success? So much for our hopes of freeing Bianca.
Let him enter. Call in my lady-in-waiting.
Youll be the one I adore, my dearest. And Ill serve you as I do now, forever.
Believe me, noble lord, Gloucestershire is unknown to me: these high wild hills and rough uneven roads have made us go more slowly. And yet your words have been like sugar, making the hard way sweet and delicious. It will be a tiring journey from Ravenspurgh to Cotswold for Ross and Willoughby, lacking your company, which, I say, has very much improved our progress. But theirs is sweetened by the hope to have what I have; and hope of future joy is almost as good as hope currently enjoyed. So by this their journey will seem short, as mine has in your company.
Were going to die! Pray, pray! Were going to die!
A man who's been cheated on isn't a man; he has the cuckold's horns, and so is a monstrous beast.
It's good to see you.
Come on, now, get your clothes off. Florizel's half-stripped already.
Master, maybe it's a gathering to welcome us to town.
Wherever I can find meat, or rather, where I eat meat.
Only if doing nothing would be punishable by death under the law.
[To HORTENSIO as LITIO] Well, come with me, and don't be discouraged. Proceed in your lessons with my younger daughter. She's a quick learner and will be grateful for your help. Sir Petruchio, will you come with us, or should I send my daughter Kate to you?
And us, too.
Weren't you with the Countess Olivia just now?
You who are more awful than any heart could believe, the only explanation you can give is to go hang yourself.
Well, when you are gentle you can have one too, and not before.
Rome's emperor, and nephew, stop it; these differences must be discussed quietly. The feast is ready, which Titus has carefully prepared to make peace between you, and to bring love, fellowship, and honor to Rome. So please come and take your places at the table.
Your wish is my command. My friend Cassio will die. But let Desdemona live.
[As CAMBIO] While you, sweet dear, prove to be the mistress of my heart!
From soldiers at war. And it's bold of you to talk like a soldier, when you're only a fool.
That Cesario, the Duke's gentleman. We thought he was a coward, but he actually fights like the devil himself.
Dionyza, there's never been such a horrible murder committed on the earth.
May the heavens smile upon this holy act of marriage, so that afterwards nothing happens to make us feel sorrowful about it.
A gentleman.
There's no question about that.
Give me your hand, sir.
[To SIR TOBY BELCH] No, I'm telling you, he doesn't want to hear about God.
Oh, that's the punishment for the shepherd's son. Forget about him! They'll make an example out of him.
Well, I'm doing well. Everything's quite nice around here. Where is my wife?
Nothing but sensations! The oracle is fulfilled, the king's daughter is found. So many wonderful things have happened in the last hour that even ballad-writers won't be able to express it.[THIRD GENTLEMAN comes in] Here comes Lady Paulina's servant; he can tell you more. [To the THIRD GENTLEMAN] How are you, sir? This news sounds so much like a fairytale that it can hardly be true. Has the king found his heir?
I must believe you because you're my teacher, or else, I promise you, I would keep arguing. But let it go.Now, Litio, it's your turn. Good teacher, I hope you're not offended that I've been equally friendly to both of you.
[So only HORTENSIO can hear] Do me a favor and eat it all up yourself, Hortensio.May it do your gentle heart much good, Kate. Eat quickly. And now, my honey love, we will return to your father's house and party with the best of them, with silken coats and caps and golden rings, with ruffs and cuffs and petticoats and things, with scarves and fans and two sets of fine clothes, with amber bracelets, beads, and all such tricks. What, have you finished? The tailor is waiting to dress you in ruffled finery.
Come on. You'll never find a better man for the job than Cassio.
[Whispering] No, be patient, or we'll ruin our plan.
Ha! She's a lamb, a dove, an innocent child compared to him! I'll tell you what happened, Sir Lucentio: when the priest asked him if he would take Katherine as his wife, he answered, "Yes, by God's wounds!" and swore so loudly that everyone was shocked and the priest dropped the prayer book. And when the priest bent down to pick it back up, that lunatic bridegroom gave him such a smack that both priest and book went flying "Now pick them up," he said then, "if anyone dares to."
Farewell, farewell! One more kiss, and Ill go down the ladder.
I've been in many storms, but, until now, I've never seen a night as bad as this.
Don't you mean the opposite? You're better because of your friends.
He has no money for these Irish wars, even with all those heavy taxes, except by the robbing of the banished duke.
And how do your feelings about what I've just said affect your chances at good fortune?
Well, now I see you have a backbone, and I think more highly of you now than ever before. Give me your hand, Roderigo. Your accusation against me is understandable, but I still insist that I have behaved honestly in helping you with your situation.
Perhaps youve memorized it. But, I beg your answer, can you read anything you see?
You are Timandra?
With my lord, madam.
Be quiet: the gardener that allowed such a mess is getting what he deserves; fall is coming after spring. The weeds sheltered by the tree's leaves (parasites that seemed to hold it up by eating it) are all plucked up, root and all, by BolingbrokeI mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, and Green.
Id give the world to make sure they do not see you here.
Come, sir, I won't let you go yet. Come on, my young soldier, put your weapon away. You've gotten excited by a taste of battle. Come on.
I feel much better: I weep for joy to stand upon my kingdom once again. [Kneels to touch the ground] Dear earth, I touch you with my hand, even as rebels wound you with their horses' hoofs: just as a mother who's been separated from her child smiles and cries when they're reunited, so I greet you, my earth, both crying and smiling, and honor you with my royal hand. Let no food grow for your sovereign's enemies, my gentle earth, and don't give them anything to comfort thembut let your venomous spiders and toads lie in their way, biting the treacherous feet that tread on you. Let your plants sting them; when they pluck a flower, let there be a poisonous snake inside it whose forked tongue could kill them in an instant. Don't make fun of me for talking to the ground, my lords; this earth will hear me and the stones themselves will rise to my defense, before her native king is defeated by rebellion.
Forgive me, master. Ill obey your commands and perform all my work as a sprite both pleasantly and ungrudgingly.
[Singing] But I will never die.
I wont fail. It will feel like twenty years until then. Ive forgotten why I called you back.
Good morning, neighbor Gremio.Hello and God bless you, gentlemen!
No, no, by God's good grace, his son will become king.
Whats happening? Are there devils here? Are you trying to trick me with these savages and men from the Indies, huh? I didnt escape from drowning only to be frightened by your four legs. As the old saying goes, "He won't back up even for the most handsome man who ever walked on four legs." And they'll say it again for as long as I'm still alive and breathing.
No, give me the one I gave to you.
Don't be so quick to confuse my meaning. I mean that I love your daughter with my soul, and I intend to make her Queen of England.
Why, what's the matter? Is he talking nonsense?
Yes.
And twenty caged nightingales sing along. Or do you want to sleep? We'll bring you to a couch that's softer and more fragrant than the lustful bed of Semiramis. Say you want to walk, and we'll strew the ground with flowers. Or do you want to ride? Your horses will be made ready, their harnesses studded with gold and pearls. Do you like hawking? You have hawks that can soar higher than the morning lark. Or do you want to hunt? Your hounds will make the heavens and earth echo with their barks.
Ill forget it, so youll have to stand there forever, because of how much I love your company.
What did you say?
I'm here.
Have you seen my daughter?
These kinds of formalities were first devised to give meaning to meaningless deeds, hollow greetings, and false kindness. It is sad that it is shown here, where true friendship and ceremony is not needed. Please sit down. You are more welcome to my fortunes than they are welcome to me.
Hold him securely until the Prince arrives.
It's excellently done, if that's the way God made it.
Or weeds.
Carry me inside some house, Benvolio, or else I will faint. May a plague strike both your families! Theyve made me into food for worms. Im finished. Curse your families!
I'm not crazy, Sir Topas. I tell you that this house is dark.
[To herself] You were a murderous villain, and you still are.
Go on, then.
Madam, my mind was troubled this morning, so an hour before dawn I went out for a walk. As I walked, I saw your son beneath the sycamore grove that grows near the western edge of the city. I walked toward him, but he noticed me and ran and hid in the woods. I assumed that he must be feeling the same way I was, and was looking for a place where he wouldn't be found. So I continued on, following my own inclination to not pursue Romeo and ask him what was on his mind. I was happy to leave Romeo alone as he fled from me. Besides, I was feeling so weary of company that even being with myself was being with one too many people.
But you seem fine now. How did you sober up so fast?
Where did the man who killed Mercutio run? Tybalt, that murderer, which way did he go?
Sir, I'm sorry I've gotten you so worked up. But I could go one step further.
Another man? The plague, the plague!
Johnthe Duke of Norfolk; Lord Walter Ferrers; Sir Robert Brakenbury; and Sir William Brandon.
[Reading] "Farewell then, and may God have mercy upon one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine, but my hope of surviving is better than yours, so watch yourself. Signed, your friend, if you were friendly in return, and your sworn enemy,Andrew Aguecheek"[To ANDREW] If this letter won't make him get up and fight, then his legs must not work. I'll give it to him.
Alas, Iago, what should I do to win back my husband? Good friend, go to him. For I swear by heaven, I do not know what I did to lose him. I kneel down here and swear it: if I ever betrayed his love, either by some actual deed or even by just thinking about doing something; if my eyes, ears, or anything else ever delighted in any other man; if I never really loved him or don't love him now, or won't continue to love him dearly (even as he tries to divorce me), then may I lose all comforts! Unkindness is powerfuland his unkindness could kill mebut it can never change my love for him. I cannot say "whore." The word catches in my throat even as I try to say it now. Not all the pleasures in the world could make me do the act that would earn me that name.
God bless you! Good friend, tell me why that torch is lying over there for no good reason? It's offering its light to no one but worms and eyeless skulls. As far as I can tell, it seems to be burning in the Capulet tomb.
[Realizing something] Yes, that's it! Come here!
Oh, it's this that makes your servants hang their heads in sorrow!
Youre up on deck again? What are you doing here? Should we just give up and drown? Are you in the mood to sink?
Just as I thought. How many of them do you think are there?
[As LUCENTIO] Old graybeard, your love has frozen over.
What about it, Biondello?
Ariel, go tell my goblin servants to make their joints shake with convulsions, to make them double over with cramps, and cover them bruises so that they have more spots than a leopard or wildcat.
No, listen, men, follow my lead. Do you care more about what this crazy, tyrant king thinks of you than you do about the queen's life? She's incredibly gracious and innocent, and he's just jealous.
You can tell him yourself; he's with your father, the king.
Oh, please, won't you?
Noble lords, go to the old outer walls of that ancient castle, and sound the trumpet to announce our intention to talk with him. Say: Henry Bolingbroke kneels to King Richard and kisses his hand, in allegiance and true good faith, and comes here to lay my army and power at his feetprovided that my banishment be repealed and he freely returns my property to me. If not, I'll use the advantage of my numbers to cover the summer's dust with showers of blood rained from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmenalthough to drench fair King Richard's green land with such a scarlet storm could not be further from my intention, as this show of respect demonstrates! Go, tell him that, while we march here on this grassy plain. But let's march without the noise of threatening war drums, so that our offer of peace may be taken favorably from this castle's old battlements. I think King Richard and I should meet with no less force than fire and water, when they thunder and bring tears to the cheek of heaven. But if he's the fire, I'll be the submissive water: he'll rage while I rain my waters on the earth, and not on him. March on, and make sure to tell me how King Richard looks.
He then tells your Lordship that tonight he dreamed that the boar cut off his head. He also says that there will be two council meetings tomorrow, and that the results of one meeting may make you and Stanleywho will be at the othervery sorry indeed. Because of this, he wants to know if you'll ride with him to the north as soon as possible, to escape the danger that his soul senses.
I say it's the moon that shines so bright.
If you think that my management has been poor or dishonest, have me inspected by the strictest auditors to prove my integrity. This is how the gods reward me, when greedy freeloaders have eaten everything in the kitchen and drunk all the wine, and when hired musicians have been made to occupy and light up every room in the house. I have given myself up to wastefulness and now all I can do is cry about it.
Who had them arrested?
And may the Lord protect the crown from him! Is he trying to set up barriers between my children and me? I am their mother. Who will forbid me from seeing them?
You repulsive slave! You who are completely resistant to any effort to make you good, and are instead capable of every evil thing! I pitied you. I made the effort to teach you to speak, and taught you some new thing nearly every hour. When you, savage, didnt know the meaning of the words you were speaking, and would babble like some beast, I gave you words that would let you make your desires understood. But even though you learned, your evil nature made it so that people who were good could not stand to be with you. And so, just as you deserved, you were sent to live in this cave, which is a more suitable place for you to live than a prison would be.
Where did we leave off?
[To himself ] I rubbed this young pimple as much as I can, and he's getting angry. Now, whether he kills Cassio or Cassio kills him, or they each kill each other, it's all good for me. If Roderigo lives, he will make me pay him back for all the gold and jewels I took from him as gifts for Desdemona. I can't have that. If Cassio survives, his beauty every day makes me seem ugly by comparison. And besides, the Moor might tell him what I've said about himthat would be very dangerous for me. No, he must die. But I hear him coming.
You'll find us both at Crosby Place.
With more whoring, and more mischief first. This payment is just a token.
If that's so, then don't be tongue-tied. Come with me, and with our bitter words let's smother my damned son Richard who smothered your two sons.
Sir, they've been much speedier than expected.
Let's keep going, please, since we've come so far already. And it can be the moon, or the sun, or whatever you like. If you want to call it a tea candle, then I swear it will be a tea candle to me from now on.
I accuse you with nothing but the truth. I have spent all my money. The jewels you took from me to send to Desdemona would have been enough to corrupt a nun. You told me she received them, and promised that, in return, I would see hope and encouragement by her immediate affection. But I have seen nothing.
Yes, dolor comes to him. Though you did not mean to, you have said the truth.
Oh, many thanks, Goth, for this is the devil incarnate who robbed Andronicus of his good hand. This is the pearl that pleased the eye of your empress, and this child is the fruit of his burning lust. Tell us, slave, what should we do with this growing image of your devil-like face? Why don't you say anything? What, are you deaf? Not a word? Come on, soldiers! Hang him on this tree, and hang the fruit of his adulterous affair next to him.
I'll watch anything you can make her do. I'll listen to anything you can make her say. Surely it's as easy to make her speak as it is to make her move?
In a moment.
Sorry, sir, it's the way things are done at sea, and we're true to tradition. Give her up quickly, because we have to throw her overboard now.
And I've been a beloved expense to him, as he's spent two thousand or so of his ducats on me.
With crossed laces?
[Trying to get CALIBAN to drink] Come on now. Open your mouth. As the saying goes, "This good liquor will make a cat talk." Open your mouth. Thisll put an end to your tremblingI can tell you that for sure. [CALIBAN opens his mouth and drinks] You can't even recognize a friend. Open your mouth again.
He slept well tonight. We're hoping he's gotten through his illness.
I was there when they opened the bag, heard the old shepherd explain how he found it, and that's when, after a moment of shock, we were all told to leave. But I thought I heard the shepherd say that he found the child.
Proof of it lies in the fact that you even need to ask, because you don't even know that you're asses. Go ahead, fool.
And whenever your burden grows too heavy, rest a while, and I will lament over King Henry's corpse.
Hello, Katefor that's your name, I hear.
God I'm sick of this job. I know that my lord spent Timon's money and now in his ingratitude is as bad as a thief.
Romeo.
And this is why your relatives avoid your house, as if beaten away by your strange insanity. Oh noble lord, remember your lineage, call back the thoughts of your former state of mind, and banish these worthless, lowly fantasies. Look how your servants attend to you, each one ready to obey your every request. Do you want music? Listen! Apollo, god of music, plays for you.
I'll talk about the thing that impressed me the most: the super-spiritual lifestyle (that's how I'd describe it, anyway) and discipline of the priests.
An excellent suggestion! Fellows, let's go.
What do you mean?
Yes, Nurse, what about that? Both begin with an  R.
We are the queen's lowly subjects, and we must obey. Farewell, brother. I will go to the king and do whatever you need me to do to get you released, even if it means calling King Edward's wife "sister." And just so you know, our brother's disgraceful conduct towards you upsets me more than you can imagine.
My lord, come on; read the list.
Gentlemen, there's some powerful people who want to come aboard. Please greet them warmly.
That he's been stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton, and now he's coming to England to claim the crown.
We are very sorry to hear this.
His colony is ending up a long way from where it began.
Sir, let me explain what has happened, which I don't think you know. Here is a letter that was found in dead Roderigo's pocket. And here is another. One of them says that Roderigo should kill Cassio.
[As LITIO] Madam, now it's in tune.
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
Go to him, Sir Topas.
Its new to you.
[To the SHEPHERD'S SON] You should do it, son. We should be "gentle" now that we're gentlemen.
I have used your badge as sign of my authority to act for you and approached them aggressively asking for money. They said no, and I came back with no more than I left with.
[To ANTONIO] When did he come to this town?
That can't be true.
Whatever is done cannot be undone. Men make mistakes sometimes, and then they repent when they have the time. If I did take the kingdom from your sons, then to make up for it I'll give it to your daughter. If I've killed your children, then I'll give them new life by having children with your daughter. A grandmother is hardly loved less than a mother. Grandchildren are just one step removed from children, made of your same substance and your very blood. They take the same amount of effort, minus that one night of labor which you suffered for your daughter's sake. Your children troubled you in your youth, but my children will comfort you in your old age. Your only real loss is that your son wasn't king, but through that loss your daughter will become queen. I can't repay you as much as I'd like to, so accept what kindness I can offer. Your son Dorsetwho fled in fear and joined the French army against mewould come quickly home to high promotions and great dignity if this marriage takes place. The king who calls your beautiful daughter "wife" will call Dorset "brother." Once again you'll be the mother to a king, and all the ruins of unhappy times will be repaired with double their value in contentment. Why, we can look forward to many good days ahead! The liquid tears you've shed will return, transformed into pearls. Your happiness will increase to ten times its original size, plus interest. Go then, my future mother-in-law; go to your daughter. Use your experience to make her bold in her youthful innocence. Prepare her ears to hear my courting words. Put in her tender heart the ambition to be queen. Acquaint the Princess with the sweet, silent hours of joy in marriage, and when I've punished that petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham, I will return crowned with victory wreaths and lead your daughter to a conquerer's bed. I will transmit all my victory to her, and she will be the  real conquerorthe emperor of the emperor.
Madam, I am sorry for your distress. Since I know your cause is right and virtuous, I agree to go with you. I don't care much about what will happen to me. My wish is that only good things happen to you. When are you planning on going?
I don't wish that. My love for him is so strong that I don't mindplease help unpin this for meeven his stubbornness, his reprimands, his frowns.
Why? Are all beggars whipped in this country, then?
Please break up this war of words, Benvolio. My wits cant keep up.
Welcome, my lord. I'm just entertaining myself and waiting for an audience with the duke. I don't think he wants to be spoken to.
Take off that gown, Trinculo. Give me that gown, or I swear by my hand, I will beat you up.
This is irresponsible, sir.
Please, let me speak. After the magic spell you cast on me last time you were here, I sent that ring to you. With that trick I degraded myself, my servant, and you, I'm afraid. I must then accept your judgment of this act, which you probably condemnfor I forced that ring on you through shameful trickery, and without your consent. What must you think of me? Haven't you tied my honor to a stake like a bear, and let the hounds of your anger attack it? But I've shown my situation clearly enough for someone of your intelligence to understand. My heart's on my sleeveI can't hide my passion. So let me hear you speak.
Did they go back to the court?
[To ALONSO] Andare you listening to me, sir?
Sir Gremio, are you coming from the church?
As happy as you want it to be.
Is the news true that good King Edward has died?
As kind as snow during harvest time. Come, you're deceiving yourself. It's Richard who sent us here to kill you.
With me? Of course. Hello, gentlemen.
May God make your Majesty as happy as you once were.
Where is your army, then, to beat him back? Where are your tenants and your followers? Aren't they on the western shore right now, helping his rebels disembark safely from their ships?
They've fired their shot of courtesy. We at least know it's a friendly ship.
Are you smiling? I sent for you on a sad occasion.
What's the problem, sir?
Villains look good in your company.
Madam, quickly, what day is that?
An incredible miracle!
What evil magician has conjured up this devil to interrupt our sacred burial procession?
If you do, my speech would have the very vile effects that I didn't want it to. Cassio is my deserving friendmy Lord, I see you're troubled.
We don't know.
Hey, what's that noise?
No, I don't want you.
I won't bother with it. A conscience makes a man a coward. A man can't steal without it accusing him; he can't swear without it restraining him; he can't sleep with his neighbor's wife without it exposing him. It's a blushing, shamefaced spirit that betrays a man's heart. It fills him with obstacles. It once made me return a purse full of gold that I found. A conscience can turn any man into a beggar. It's been thrown out of towns and cities like a dangerous enemy. Any man who wants to live well should trust only himself, and live without his conscience.
Let's have some funny ones!
But it's true. I swear it's true, or else I'm a Turk. You get up in the morning to play around and only work when you go to bed.
How long shall I be patient? Ah, how long shall duty to my king make me allow wrongdoing? Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment, not Gaunt's criticisms, nor England's private injuries, nor poor Bolingbroke being prevented from marrying, nor my own disgrace has ever made me give a sour look or provoke one wrinkle on my sovereign's face. [to Richard] I am the last of noble Edward's sons, of whom your father, Prince of Wales, was first: that young and princely gentleman was more fierce than a lion and more gentle than a lamb in peace. You have his face, for he looked exactly like you at your age. But when he frowned, it was against the French and not against his friends; he spent within his means and not what his father had earned; his hands were not stained with the blood of his family, but bloody with the enemies of his family. Oh Richard! York is too far gone with grief, or else he never would compare the two of you.
Oh, no, he is going to Mauritania, and taking the fair Desdemona with him, unless some freak accident keeps him here. And nothing would serve this purpose more than the removal of Cassio.
That response could have come from my own mouth.
Believe me, I'm not crazy. I'm telling you the truth.
No way! Maybe you took some small opportunities to mention it to me, and you took my deafness on a few occasions as an excuse not to ask me ever again.
You're a serious, noble advisor, and wise about many different things: tell me, if you can, what this girl is, or is supposed to be, that she's made me cry so much?
[As LUCENTIO] Very good. Now keep playing your part, and act as respectable as a father should.
My lord, I saw the prince about two days ago, and told him about the tournament happening at Oxford.
Of all the men who've tried, I hope you succeed! I hope this ends well for you!
Help, help, help! There's a madman trying to murder me!
This hagwith bags under her eyeswas brought to this island while pregnant, and was left here by the sailors. You, my slave, as you yourself have said, were her servant then. And, because you were too kind and sensitive to carry out her dirty and disgusting commands, you refused her orders. In a rage that could not be calmed, and with the help of her most powerful spirits, she locked you into a hole in the middle of a pine tree that had been split in two. You were painfully imprisoned there for twelve years. During that time she died and you were stuck there, groaning in pain at the same rate that the blades of a mill wheel hit the water. At that time the island had no people on it, other than the son that Sycorax gave birth to on the islandthat freckled son of a hag.
What's this? Are you crazy?
[CLEON, DIONYZA, and the others kneel to PERICLES] May the gods of Greece protect you! And we'll pray for you.
I have a message from Antiochus for Prince Pericles but, since I got here I've heard that the prince is out on some unknown travels. I guess I'll have to take my message back to where it came from.
Well then, give me a final answer of whether I'll have the earldom or not.
I don't care.
No, I think that willful woman lies. My face is tan.
Translate them.
As you can see, I've been shipwrecked here.
Servant-monster? What foolishness is found on this island! They say there are just five people on the island. Were three of them. If the other two are as crazy as us, our country is going to collapse.
The news I have to tell your Majesty is that sudden floods and heavy rains have dispersed and scattered Buckingham's army. Buckingham himself has wandered away alone, though no one knows where.
You're to bring his daughter to dinner.
Yes, pilgrimlips theyre supposed to use to pray.
Your life has dishonored his death.
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Yes, but, if you don't mind, not before me. A lieutenant's must get into heaven before the flag-bearer. But enough of this, let's get down to business. Forgive us our sins, God! Gentlemen, let's get to work. Don't think I'm drunk now, gentlemen. Here's my flag-bearer. This is my right hand, and this is my left hand. I'm not drunk. I can stand well enough, and my words aren't slurred.
Please, sir, no more of that. Lets not weigh down our memories with a sadness that should be all in the past.
[From offstage] Let me in, and Ill tell you why Im here. I come from Lady Juliet.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in his hand. Oh, you lying woman! You turn my heart to stone and make me call what I intend to do a murder, instead of a sacrifice! I saw the handkerchief.
Put that one aside. Another.
An error of the worst kind! Lady, don't judge a book by its coverthat's to say that I wear jester's clothes on the outside, but my brain is still sharp. My holy lady, let me prove that you're a fool.
Yes, you are honest men.
Where are they?
There stands the castle, by that patch of trees, with three hundred men defending it, as I have heard; and in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour, but no other noblemen.
The moon? That's the sun! There's no moonlight now.
Dont deny to him that you love me.
Mary, mother of God! Are you in such a hurry? Indeed, you need to calm down. Is this the way to soothe my aching bones? From here on out, carry your own messages.
Stop! Dont do anything out of desperation. Are you a man? You look like a man. But your tears are womanly. Your wildness is like the irrational fury of a beast. Youre like an inappropriate woman hiding within a man, or, even worse, a shameful beast hiding within a half-man, half-woman! You amaze me. By my holy order, I swear I thought you were stronger and more stable than this. Have you killed Tybalt? Will you kill yourself, and in performing such a sin also kill your wife, who shares your life? Why are you ranting about your birth, the heavens, and the earth? You are made of the joining of all three, and now want nothing to do with them? You bring shame to your body, your love, and your mind. You are blessed with all three, but like a moneylender you do not use your body, love, or mind for their true purpose. Without honor or nobility, your body is just a wax figure. The love that you swore is just a hollow lie, since you now threaten to kill the love that you vowed to cherish. Your mind, that key to both your body and your love, has failed to handle both of them. Youre like an unskilled soldier who accidentally explodes his own gunpowder because he does not know how to use it: you end up killing yourself with the very thing meant to protect you. Now get a hold of yourself, man! Your Juliet is alive (for whose sake you were just threatening to kill yourself). That is something to be happy about. Tybalt tried to kill you, but you killed Tybalt. That is something to be happy about. The law that promised death for you was mercifully changed into exileanother thing to be happy about. You have been blessed multiple times, and are surrounded by brightest happiness. But like a misbehaved and sullen girl, youre pouting about your bad luck and thwarted love. Now listen to me: those who act the way you are acting now die miserable. Go, be with your love, as we planned. Climb up to her bedroom and comfort her. But make sure to leave before the watchmen take their positions, because they will stop you before you can escape to Mantua. Youll live in Mantua until we can announce your marriage publicly, make peace between your families, and beg the Prince to pardon you. Then well welcome you back with twenty thousand times more joy than youll feel when leaving. Nurse, go to Juliet before Romeo follows. Give my regards to your lady, and tell her to hurry everybody in her house to bed. It's likely that their sorrow will make them want to go to sleep, anyway. Romeo is coming.
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed!
He has no common sense, no restraint! He spends his money so thoughtlessly that there is no way he will ever learn to care for it responsibly or even stop lending it out extravagantly. He does not even take account of what he gives away, nor does he give a thought to what means he has to keep this up. I have never seen someone so dumb, but so kind. But what can we do? He will not listen until he suffers for his actions. I must be honest with him, and here he comes from hunting. Damn, damn, damn!
Show me your back and leave.
[Reading] "First, a loose-bodied gown"
Well, sir, because silver has a sweet sound.
[To himself] What a sharp and thoughtful mind he has! To smooth over his mockery of his uncle, he cleverly and politely mocks himself. It's amazing that he's so cunning while so young.
Psh, no, don't believe the rumors. He has plenty of money.
I'm not telling the story very well, but the king and Camillo seemed happy to see each other. They stared at each other so intensely it seemed like their eyes would pop out of their heads. They could hardly speak, but they said it all in their hugs and gestures. They looked like they'd seen the world rebuiltor destroyed. They were filled with wonder. But no one who was watching could tell if they were joyful, or sad. It was the extreme version of one of those two.[SECOND GENTLEMAN comes in] Here comes another gentleman who probably knows more. What's the news, Rogero?
Why then, the beef, and leave the mustard off.
Flavius.
Good evening to you, lady!
Your actions are my dreams! Oh, so you had Polixenes's bastard, and I just dreamed it? Like all of your kind, you're past shame, past truth. Denying your crimes only proves you've committed them. The brat is gone, on its own now, since no father will claim itthough that's more your fault than the brat's. Now you'll feel my justice. Expect nothing less than a death sentence.
[Gesturing to CAMILLO] And my friend, too?
Should I speak badly of my own husband? Ah, my poor husband, who will speak well of you when I, your wife of three hours, have been calling you such dreadful names? But why, you villain, did you kill my cousin? Because my villain of a cousin would have killed you, my husband. I refuse to cry. These tears which seem like sadness for Tybalts death are actually tears of joy that Romeo is still alive. My husband, whom Tybalt would have killed, is alive. And Tybalt, who wanted to kill my husband, is dead. This is good news. So why am I crying? Because there was news thats even worse than that of Tybalts death. Worse news that kills me inside. I wish I could forget it, but it forces its way into my memory the way sins obsess guilty minds. Tybalt is dead, and Romeo has been banished. That word banished, that single word banished, is worse than the death of ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalts death would have been misery enough even if nothing else had happened. Or, if misery loves company, and one grief must necessarily follow another, then it would have been better had the Nurse, after telling me that Tybalt was dead, then told me that my mother or my father, or even both, were gone. That would have pushed me into normal feelings of grief. But to tell me that Tybalts is dead and then say, Romeo has been banished. To say that is the same as saying that my father, my mother, Tybalt, Romeo, and Juliet have all been killed, are all dead. Romeo has been banished. The death contained in those four words is infinite, unmeasurable. No words can express that misery. Where are my father and mother, Nurse?
But still, read Hortensio's scale.
I am not flattering you. I am calling you a wretch.
It takes just a year or two for a man's true colors to become apparent. They're nothing but hungry stomachs, and we women are the food. All they want is to get their fill of us, and when they've had enough they throw us back up. Look, here comes Cassio and my husband.
No matter. Get going, and hire those horses. Ill be with you soon.
But yours will burn out. Stand back, fickle boy. Age is what nourishes.
What? How?
That's a lot.Servants, leave me and her alone.Madam, undress and come to bed.
My lord, he is alive, and safe in Leicester, where we can now go, if you'd like.
Oh sir, please don't shoot the messenger. The prince, your son, out of worrying so much about his mother, is gone.
I'm just a stranger here: you can see where I live from the deck of this boat.
You must forget about that.
Timon must be joking. There's no way he needs fifty five hundred talents.
Then Ill give you something you wont forget.
No, I beg you. [To himself] I must obey. His magic is so powerful that he could even defeat Setebosthe god that my mother used to worshipand make him into his servant.
I've just been crying to myself, or else I would have said something before now. Dear gods, look down from the sky and place a blessed crown on this couple, since it was you who led us on the path that brought us here.
I'm not afraid of any dead uncle.
Oh, what an excellent planwe'll make him a sponge for the wine.
Come, Kate, we'll go to bed. We three are all married, but you two are done foryour wives are too disobedient.
Was there ever a man who suffered like I do? But who's this coming?
Farewell, you sad new queen.
Oh no, my reasons are too deep and too deadtoo deep and too dead, just like my poor infants in their graves.
But why we should we govern our garden this waymaking sure everything is in proportionwithin these walls, while the world outside is full of weeds, her fairest flowers unable to grow, her fruit-trees all cut down, her hedges ruined, her mazes disorganized, and her healthy herbs swarming with caterpillars?
And what about the sixth and the last? It's very polite to go last, you know.
Good fool, I'll certainly reward you if you'll help me get a candle, a pen, ink, and paper. I swear on my word as a gentleman that I'll always be grateful to you for it.
Lucentio, gentle sir.
Yes.
That "once" isn't likely to come to pass now that your father's on his way. I'm very sorry to hear that you're at odds with your father; you should be obedient to him. And I'm sorry, too, that you won't be able to enjoy this girl, since her station in life does not match her beauty.
[As VINCENTIO] Arrest the villain. I believe he means to cheat someone in this city while pretending to be me.
It's the voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.
Calm down, calm down! Mercutio, be calm. Youre talking about nothing.
Look behind you! Defend yourself! There are enemies here.
I swear
Your poor queen! If only you could have brought her here, so that I could have met her.
Find out how this foul murder came to happen.
Of course, come to my house and I'll bring them to you. Look, Thaisa woke up.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm    As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt!    As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed    I care not for thy sword, Ill make thee known    Though I lost twenty lives.   Help! Help, ho! Help!    The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!
I pray thee, mark me.    I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated    To closeness and the bettering of my mind    With that which, but by being so retired,    O'erprized all popular rate, in my false brother    Awaked an evil nature.   And my trust,    Like a good parent, did beget of him    A falsehood in its contrary as great    As my trust was, which had indeed no limit,    A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,    Not only with what my revenue yielded    But what my power might else exact,   like one    Who having into truth, by telling of it,    Made such a sinner of his memory    To credit his own lie   he did believe    He was indeed the duke, out o' th' substitution    And executing th' outward face of royalty,    With all prerogative:   Hence his ambition growing    Dost thou hear?
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,    After the last enchantment you did here,    A ring in chase of you.   So did I abuse    Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you:    Under your hard construction must I sit,    To force that on you, in a shameful cunning    Which you knew none of yours.   What might you think?    Have you not set mine honor at the stake,    And baited it with all the unmuzzled thoughts    That tyrannous heart can think?   To one of your receiving    Enough is shown.   A cypress, not a bosom,    Hides my heart. So, let me hear you speak.
At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer    What I desire to give, and much less take    What I shall die to want.   But this is trifling,    And all the more it seeks to hide itself    The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning,    And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!    I am your wife if you will marry me.    If not, Ill die your maid. To be your fellow    You may deny me, but Ill be your servant    Whether you will or no.
Yours, if you talk of tales. And so farewell.
[as CAMBIO]  Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Sister, content you in my discontent.    Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe.  My books and instruments shall be my company,On them to look and practice by myself.
Prithee, do not turn me about. My stomach is not constant.
Ay, my good lord.
Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.
Why, then, tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn.    On Tuesday noon, or night, or Wednesday morn.    I prithee name the time, but let it not    Exceed three days.   In faith, hes penitent,    And yet his trespass, in our common reason    (Save that, they say, the wars must make example    Out of her best)   is not, almost, a fault    T' incur a private check. When shall he come?    Tell me, Othello.   I wonder in my soul    What you would ask me that I should deny    Or stand so mamm'ring on. What?   Michael Cassio    That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,    When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,    Hath ta'en your part,   to have so much to do    To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much
[aside]  And supper too, although thou knowst it not.Come, will you go?
Thus, sir:    Although this lord of weak remembrancethis,    Who shall be of as little memory    When he is earthed   hath here almost persuade    (For hes a spirit of persuasion only,    Professes to persuade) the king his sons alive,    'Tis as impossible that hes undrowned    And he that sleeps here swims.
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst makeNo excuse current but to hang thyself.
Sir, he may live.    I saw him beat the surges under him,    And ride upon their backs.   He trod the water,    Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted    The surge most swoll'n that met him.     His bold head    'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared    Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke    To th' shore,   that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed,    As stooping to relieve him. I not doubt    He came alive to land.
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
Ay, madam. He desires to make atonement    Betwixt the duke of Gloucester and your brothers,    And betwixt them and my Lord Chamberlain,    And sent to warn them to his royal presence.
Down with the topmast! Yare, lower, lower! Bring her totry wi' th' main course.
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,    Till we can clear these ambiguities    And know their spring, their head, their true descent,    And then will I be general of your woes,    And lead you even to death.   Meantime forbear,    And let mischance be slave to patience.    Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
Till Pericles be dead,My heart can lend no succor to my head.
What will I do, thinkst thou?
To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
Most strange!
Ill be your purse-bearer and leave youFor an hour.
[as LUCENTIO]  And I am one that love Bianca moreThan words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou, why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.   Thou wilt quarrel witha man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?   Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling.   Thouhast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep inthe sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter?   With another, fortying his new shoes with old ribbon? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,And show more sign of her obedience,Her new-built virtue and obedience.
And ours, my lord.
'Tis no matter. Let it go. Theres few or none will entertain it.
Who shall hinder me?    I will despair, and be at enmity    With cozening hope:   he is a flatterer,    A parasite, a keeper back of death,    Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,    Which false hope lingers in extremity.
Soft you, a word or two before you go.    I have done the state some service, and they know t.    No more of that.   I pray you, in your letters,    When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,    Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate,    Nor set down aught in malice.   Then must you speak    Of one that loved not wisely, but too well.    Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,    Perplexed in the extreme.   Of one whose hand,    Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away    Richer than all his tribe.   Of one whose subdued eyes,    Albeit unused to the melting mood,    Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees    Their medicinal gum.   Set you down this,    And say besides that in Aleppo once,    Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk    Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,    I took by the throat the circumcisèd dog,    And smote him, thus.
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips:Not bodys death, but bodys banishment.
I warrant you, my lord.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave!   [To ROMEO]   Pray you, sir, a word.And as I told you, my young lady bid me inquire you out. What she bade me say, I will keep to myself.   But first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fools paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say.   For the gentlewoman is young, and therefore, if you should deal double with her, trulyit were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
What, thyself?
O, I am mock'd,And thou by some incensed god sent hitherTo make the world to laugh at me.
Oh, is that all? What will you give me now For the same handkerchief?
Thou hast. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.
So please my lord, I might not be admitted,    But from her handmaid do return this answer:    The element itself, till seven years' heat,    Shall not behold her face at ample view,    But like a cloistress, she will veiled walk    And water once a day her chamber round    With eye-offending brine   all this to season    A brothers dead love, which she would keep fresh    And lasting in her sad remembrance.
Alas Iago,    What shall I do to win my lord again?    Good friend, go to him. For, by this light of heaven,    I know not how I lost him.   Here I kneel:    If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love,    Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,    Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,    Delighted them, or any other form,    Or that I do not yet, and ever did,    And ever will   though he do shake me off    To beggarly divorcementlove him dearly,    Comfort forswear me!   Unkindness may do much,    And his unkindness may defeat my life,    But never taint my love.   I cannot say whore,    It does abhor me now I speak the word.    To do the act that might the addition earn    Not the worlds mass of vanity could make me.
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?    Where be thy tenants and thy followers?    Are they not now upon the western shore,    Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia,    Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.    We must not now displease him.
Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak with you.
When Proteus cannot love where he's beloved.    Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,    For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith    Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths    Descended into perjury, to love me.    Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou'dst two;    And that's far worse than none;   better have none    Than plural faith which is too much by one:    Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons!A natural perspective, that is and is not!
Cesario is your servants name, fair princess.
Sweet lady, ho, ho.
I know thou dost; and, sweet Revenge, farewell.
The heavens,Through you, increase our wonder and set upYour fame forever.
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.    How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?    Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,    Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought    So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?
Come, come;    I love the king your father, and yourself,    With more than foreign heart.   We every day    Expect him here: when he shall come and find    Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,    He will repent the breadth of his great voyage;    Blame both my lord and me, that we have taken    No care to your best courses.   Go, I pray you,    Walk, and be cheerful once again; reserve    That excellent complexion, which did steal    The eyes of young and old.   Care not for me    I can go home alone.
No, indeed, did she not: here have I brought himback again.
Why then,    She's fled unto that peasant Valentine;    And Eglamour is in her company.    'Tis true; for Friar Laurence met them both,    As he in penance wander'd through the forest;    Him he knew well, and guess'd that it was she,    But, being mask'd, he was not sure of it;    Besides, she did intend confession    At Patrick's cell this even; and there she was not;    These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence.    Therefore, I pray you, stand not to discourse,    But mount you presently and meet with me    Upon the rising of the mountain-foot    That leads towards Mantua, whither they are fled:    Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
Have I a tongue to doom my brothers death,    And shall the tongue give pardon to a slave?    My brother killed no man; his fault was thought,    And yet his punishment was bitter death.    Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath,    Kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised?    Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?    Who told me how the poor soul did forsake    The mighty Warwick and did fight for me?    Who told me, in the field by Tewkesbury,    When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,    And said Dear brother, live, and be a king?    Who told me, when we both lay in the field    Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me    Even in his garments and did give himself,    All thin and naked, to the numb-cold night?    All this from my remembrance brutish wrath    Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you    Had so much grace to put it in my mind.    But when your carters or your waiting vassals    Have done a drunken slaughter and defaced    The precious image of our dear Redeemer,    You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon,    And I, unjustly too, must grant it you.     [STANLEY rises]     But for my brother, not a man would speak,    Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself    For him, poor soul.   The proudest of you all    Have been beholding to him in his life,    Yet none of you would once beg for his life.    O God, I fear Thy justice will take hold    On me and you, and mine and yours for this!    Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.    Ah, poor Clarence.
Basta,    content thee, for I have it full.    We have not yet been seen in any house,    Nor can we be distinguished by our faces    For man or master.   Then it follows thus:    Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,    Keep house and port and servants as I should.    I will some other be, some Florentine,    Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.    'Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once    Uncase thee. Take my colored hat and cloak.
[as LUCENTIO]  Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest wayTo the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
Whos that which rings the bell?Diablo, ho! The town will rise. Fie, Fie, lieutenant,Youll be ashamed for ever.
My lord,    Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes    Do all lie there:   it shall be so my care    To have you royally appointed as if    The scene you play were mine.   For instance, sir,    That you may know you shall not want, one word.
You have work'd for me; there's payment for you: hence!
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
To vouch this is no proof,    Without more wider and more overt test    Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods    Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
Tell thy story;    If thine consider'd prove the thousandth part    Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I    Have suffer'd like a girl:   yet thou dost look    Like Patience gazing on kings' graves, and smiling    Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?    How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin?    Recount, I do beseech thee: come, sit by me.
Madam, depart at pleasure; leave us here.
'Tis more by fortune, lady, than by merit.
Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord,Before I positively speak in this.I will resolve you herein presently.
Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost aman a doit.
O, good sir, I do.
Will t please your Honor taste of these conserves?
I once more take my leave.
[Aside]  I am almost afraid to stand aloneHere in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
No good at all that I can do for him;    Unless you call it good to pity him,    Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
Reputation, reputation, reputation! Oh, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, andwhat remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow    As I had title in thy noble husband.    I have bewept a worthy husbands death    And lived with looking on his images;    But now two mirrors of his princely semblance    Are cracked in pieces by malignant death,    And I, for comfort, have but one false glass    That grieves me when I see my shame in him.    Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother,    And hast the comfort of thy children left,    But death hath snatched my husband from mine arms    And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands,    Clarence and Edward.   O, what cause have I,    Thine being but a moiety of my moan,    To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!
Sir, I invite your highness and your train    To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest    For this one night,   whichpart of itIll waste    With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it    Go quick away: the story of my life    And the particular accidents gone by    Since I came to this isle.   And in the morn    Ill bring you to your ship and so to Naples,    Where I have hope to see the nuptial    Of these our dear-belovèd solemnized,    And thence retire me to my Milan, where    Every third thought shall be my grave.
See, see; what a man you are now!There is no other way but to tell the kingshe's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
Tomorrow, then, I judge a happy day.
No, not a whit. I find you passing gentle.    'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,    And now I find report a very liar.    For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,    But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers.    Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,    Nor bite the lip as angry wenches will,    Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk.    But thou with mildness entertainst thy wooers,    With gentle conference, soft and affable.    Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?    O slanderous world!   Kate like the hazel-twig     As hazel nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.    Oh, let me see thee walk! Thou dost not halt.
I should be wise, for honestys a foolAnd loses that it works for.
[Aside]  Villain and he be many miles asunder.  [To LADY CAPULET]  God pardon him! I do, with all my heart,And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him hereShalt with him hence.
Soft! I will go along.And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
A contract of true love to celebrate,And some donation freely to estateOn the blessed lovers.
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
[advancing]  How shall I murder him, Iago?
Fire and brimstone!
Thou wert but a lost monster.
Who comes with him?
Go fetch them hither to us presently.
So it is.
Dost thou prate, rogue?  [strikes him]
Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or I'llfetch thee with a wanion.
I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordshipthat I returned you an empty messenger.
Let him approach. Call in my gentlewoman.
O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.  [To CAMILLO]  Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.He's simple and tells much.  [To FLORIZEL]   How now, fair shepherd!    Your heart is full of something that does take    Your mind from feasting.   Sooth, when I was young    And handed love as you do, I was wont    To load my she with knacks:   I would have ransack'd    The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it    To her acceptance; you have let him go    And nothing marted with him.   If your lass    Interpretation should abuse and call this    Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited    For a reply, at least if you make a care    Of happy holding her.
My legs do better understand me, sir, than I understandwhat you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
Sir?
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak,    And speak I will. I am no child, no babe.    Your betters have endured me say my mind,    And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.    My tongue will tell the anger of my heart    Or else my heart, concealing it, will break,    And, rather than it shall, I will be free    Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
Go to, then.
My gracious uncle
On Wednesday next we solemnly set downOur coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
Hold your hands,    Both you of my inclining and the rest.    Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it    Without a prompter. Whither will you that I go    To answer this your charge?
None rare, my lord.
Ay, boy.
Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.
Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.
Leave your prating: since these good men arepleased, let them come in; but quickly now.
Canst not read?
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,Pisa renownèd for grave citizens.
If to either, thou dost ill.
Come, come, we fear the worst. All will be well.
Where's the lord governor?
Do you know this house to be a place of such resort,and will come into 't? I hear say you are ofhonourable parts, and are the governor of this place.
He kills her in her own humor.
Ill give thee armor to keep off that word Adversitys sweet milk, philosophyTo comfort thee though thou art banishèd.
Welcome home, Grumio.
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here    I snatched one half out of the jaws of death,    Relieved him with such sanctity of love,    And to his image, which methought did promise    Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
O Juliet, I already know thy grief.    It strains me past the compass of my wits.    I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,    On Thursday next be married to this county.
Princes and noble lords,    What answer shall I make to this base man?    Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,    On equal terms to give him chastisement?    Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd    With the attainder of his slanderous lips.    There is my gage, the manual seal of death,    That marks thee out for hell:   I say, thou liest,    And will maintain what thou hast said is false    In thy heart-blood, though being all too base    To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
Patience, good sir; do not assist the storm.    Here's all that is left living of your queen,    A little daughter: for the sake of it,    Be manly, and take comfort.
What wouldst thou have with me?
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester. You envy my advancement, and my friends'.God grant we never may have need of you.
[aside to  LUCENTIO  ]  Well said, master. Mum, and gaze your fill.
Come now, your one thing.
Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
Nobody. I myself. Farewell.Commend me to my kind lord. Oh, farewell!
From Isidore;He humbly prays your speedy payment.
My lord, 'tis rated    As those which sell would give: but you well know,    Things of like value differing in the owners    Are prized by their masters:   believe't, dear lord,    You mend the jewel by the wearing it.
O Harrys wife, triumph not in my woes! God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now    Has these poor men in question.   Never saw I    Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;    Forswear themselves as often as they speak:    Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them    With divers deaths in death.
'Faith, there's no way to be rid on't but by theway to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
What would my potent master? Here I am.
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.
O! We are spoiled and yonder he is! Deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.
Any thing, my lord,That my ability may undergoAnd nobleness impose: at least thus much:I'll pawn the little blood which I have leftTo save the innocent: any thing possible.
Were I chief lord of all this spacious world,    I'ld give it to undo the deed.   O lady,    Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess    To equal any single crown o' the earth    I' the justice of compare!   O villain Leonine!    Whom thou hast poison'd too:    If thou hadst drunk to him, 't had been a kindness    Becoming well thy fact:   what canst thou say    When noble Pericles shall demand his child?
Thats one of them.
It is your grace's pleasure to commend;Not my desert.
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
I am the greatest, able to do least,    Yet most suspected, as the time and place    Doth make against me, of this direful murder.    And here I stand, both to impeach and purge,    Myself condemnèd and myself excused.
What is your pleasure, madam? How is t with you?
[as LITIO]   But, wrangling pedant, this is    The patroness of heavenly harmony.    Then give me leave to have prerogative,    And when in music we have spent an hour,    Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
What, Grumio!
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed.But be thou armed for some unhappy words.
Well, my dread lordso must I call you now.
I do beseech your grace to pardon me:    It is a matter of small consequence,    Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
Naught to do with Mistress Shore? I tell thee, fellow,He that doth naught with her, excepting one, Were best he do it secretly, alone.
We but offend him. Strike!
Many years of happy days befalMy gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
I am not mad; I know thee well enough:    Witness this wretched stump, witness these crimson lines;    Witness these trenches made by grief and care,    Witness the tiring day and heavy night;    Witness all sorrow, that I know thee well    For our proud empress, mighty Tamora:    Is not thy coming for my other hand?
I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.    Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours:    Jove send her    A better guiding spirit!   What needs these hands?    You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,    Will never do him good, not one of you.  So, so: farewell; we are gone.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.  [He gives BALTHASAR money]  Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
Those are the raisèd father and his friends.You were best go in.
These are not natural events. They strengthenFrom strange to stranger.  [to BOATSWAIN]  Say, how came you hither?
Come, come, youre mocking. We will have no telling.
But you, my knight and guest;To whom this wreath of victory I give,And crown you king of this day's happiness.
[t    o  FABIAN  and  MARIA   ]   Go to, go to! Peace, peace. We must deal gently with him. Let me alone.   How do you, Malvolio? How is t with you? What, man, defy the devil!Consider, hes an enemy to mankind.
Rise, prithee, rise.    Sit down: thou art no flatterer:    I thank thee for it;   and heaven forbid    That kings should let their ears hear their    faults hid!    Fit counsellor and servant for a prince,    Who by thy wisdom makest a prince thy servant,    What wouldst thou have me do?
He something seems unsettled.
O, 'tis a verse in Horace; I know it well:I read it in the grammar long ago.
Why then I think Cassios an honest man.
That were some love but little policy.
I said, my lord, if you did know my parentage,You would not do me violence.
He that is yours, sweet lady.
And yet I come not well.
Art thou proud yet?
Say I will love her everlastingly.
I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. I am theyoungest of that name, for fault of a worse.
Oh, heaven, how got she out? Oh, treason of the blood!    Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds    By what you see them act.   Is there not charms    By which the property of youth and maidhood    May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,    Of some such thing?
I was provokèd by her sland'rous tongue,That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
O Dorset, speak not to me. Get thee gone.    Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels.    Thy mothers name is ominous to children.    If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas,    And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.    Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse,    Lest thou increase the number of the dead    And make me die the thrall of Margarets curse,    Nor mother, wife, nor Englands counted queen.
Tell me your mind.
Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
Did he confess it?
Master, you looked so longly on the maid, Perhaps you marked not whats the pith of all.
Are you a comedian?
Oh, woe the day!
No, friend, cannot you beg? Here's them in ourcountry Greece gets more with begging than we can dowith working.
At my request he would not.Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokestTo better purpose.
[as CAMBIO]  Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
By providence divine.    Some food we had and some fresh water that    A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,    Out of his charity, who being then appointed    Master of this design, did give us,   with    Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries,    Which since have steaded much.   So, of his gentleness,    Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me    From mine own library with volumes that    I prize above my dukedom.
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.
Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,Which he counts but a trifle.
A living drollery. Now I will believe    That there are unicorns,   that in Arabia    There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix    At this hour reigning there.
Ay, twas he that told me on her first. An honest man he is, and hates the slimeThat sticks on filthy deeds.
At the good queen's entreaty.
I have not deserved this.
Come, Sir Andrew, theres no remedy. The gentleman will, for his honors sake, have one bout with you.   He cannot by the duello avoid it.   But he has promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on, to t.
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
Whither?
Why should we in the compass of a pale    Keep law and form and due proportion,    Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,    When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,    Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,    Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd,    Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs    Swarming with caterpillars?
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every todyields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundredshorn. what comes the wool to?
Well, gentlemen,    I am thus resolved. On Sunday next, you know    My daughter Katherina is to be married.    [To  TRANIO  as  LUCENTIO  ]    Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca    Be bride to you, if you make this assurance.    If not, to Signior Gremio.    And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
In like manner was I in debt to my importunate    business, but he would not hear my excuse.   I am    sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my    provision was out.
Thou wrongst it more than tears with that report.
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool,    And to do that well craves a kind of wit.    He must observe their mood on whom he jests,    The quality of persons, and the time,    And, like the haggard, check at every feather    That comes before his eye.   This is a practise    As full of labor as a wise mans art,    For folly that he wisely shows is fit.    But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
You, my lords,    Look on her, mark her well; be but about    To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and    The justice of your hearts will thereto add    'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'    Praise her but for this her without-door form,    Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight    The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands    That calumny doth useO, I am out    That mercy does, for calumny will sear    Virtue itself:   these shrugs, these hums and ha's,    When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between    Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,    From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,    She's an adulteress.
[to SEBASTIAN]  The visitor will not give him o'er so.
ThatShall be when your first queen's again in breath;Never till then.
Who can be other in this royal presence?
Good morrow.
Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
Think what you will, we seize into our handsHis plate, his goods, his money and his lands.
Of Messaline. Sebastian was my father;    Such a Sebastian was my brother too,    So went he suited to his watery tomb  .  If spirits can assume both form and suit    You come to fright us.
I am hurt.A plague o both your houses! I am sped.Is he gone and hath nothing?
[sings drunkenly]    Farewell, master! Farewell, farewell.
[sitting down beside her]     Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave    As thou canst yield a melancholy seat,    Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.    O, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
[to FERDINAND]  Come, follow.  [to MIRANDA]  Speak not for him.
[Aside]   How from the finny subject of the sea    These fishers tell the infirmities of men;    And from their watery empire recollect    All that may men approve or men detect!    Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen.
Why do you speak so faintly?Are you not well?
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind    Transform'd and weaken'd?   hath Bolingbroke deposed    Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?    The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,    And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage    To be o'erpower'd;   and wilt thou, pupil-like,    Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,    And fawn on rage with base humility,    Which art a lion and a king of beasts?
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. Whathis happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but Ihave missingly noted, he is of late much retiredfrom court and is less frequent to his princelyexercises than formerly he hath appeared.
Even all I have ay, and myself and all    Will I withal endow a child of thine;    So in the Lethe of thy angry soul    Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs    Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
Will you, indeed?
On what I hate I feed not.
I know it well.What must I call her?
So is theirs and ours.
O good Sir Toby, hold! Here come the officers.
I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter andthe Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
Praised!
It cannot be.
Good morrow, cousin.
Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court:We will afflict the emperor in his pride.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!
O, pray, let's see't: for the Lord Timon, sir?
This was well done, my bird.    Thy shape invisible retain thou still.    The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither    For stale to catch these thieves.
We see the very wreck that we must suffer;    And unavoided is the danger now,    For suffering so the causes of our wreck.
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.
A most courteous exposition.
You'll take it ill.
Thats most certain.
He pours it out; Plutus, the god of gold,    Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays    Sevenfold above itself;   no gift to him,    But breeds the giver a return exceeding    All use of quittance.
Away! what art thou?
Think on thy sins.
I know not neither, I found it in my chamber.    I like the work well.   Ere it be demanded,    As like enough it will, I would have it copied.    Take it and do t, and leave me for this time.
Knock at the gate? O heavens! Spake you not these wordsplain: Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly? And come you now with knocking at the gate?
Why, that is nothing.   For I tell you, father,    I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;    And where two raging fires meet together,    They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.    Though little fire grows great with little wind,    Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all.    So I to her and so she yields to me,    For I am rough and woo not like a babe.
[From within]  Ho, daughter, are you up?
A reason mighty, strong, and effectual;    A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant,    For me, most wretched, to perform the like.    Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee;
Pray you then,Conduct me to the queen.
It is the very error of the moon,She comes more nearer earth than she was wont And makes men mad.
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears.I like you lads. About your business straight.Go, go, dispatch.
Beshrew him for t!How comes this trick upon him?
That will I.Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.
She that I spake of, our great captains captain,    Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,    Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts    A se'nnights speed.   Great Jove, Othello guard,    And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,    That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,    Make loves quick pants in Desdemonas arms,    Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits    And bring all Cyprus comfort!
But, Othello, speak.    Did you by indirect and forcèd courses    Subdue and poison this young maids affections?    Or came it by request and such fair question    As soul to soul affordeth?
Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio the lunatic.
Oh, a cherubim    Thou wast that did preserve me.   Thou didst smile    Infusèd with a fortitude from heaven,    When I have decked the sea with drops full salt,    Under my burthen groaned;   which raised in me    An undergoing stomach to bear up    Against what should ensue.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
[Aside]  True; from a gentleman to a fool.
Now is my turn to speak. Behold this child:
[as VINCENTIO]  Hes within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.
Each day still better other's happiness   ;    Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,    Add an immortal title to your crown!
Good madam,
Why, thats my dainty Ariel. I shall miss thee,    But yet thou shalt have freedom.So, so, so.    To the kings ship, invisible as thou art.    There shalt thou find the mariners asleep    Under the hatches.   The Master and the Boatswain    Being awake, enforce them to this place,    And presently, I prithee.
I think you haveAs little skill to fear as I have purposeTo put you to't. But come; our dance, I pray:Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,That never mean to part.
Go you, sir, to the senators    Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have    Deserved this hearing   bid 'em send o' the instant    A thousand talents to me.
My lord?
To do this is within the compass of mans wit, and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
You mistake, sir. I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me. My remembrance is very free and clear from any imageof offense done to any man.
As I hope    For quiet days, fair issue, and long life,    With such love as tis now,   the murkiest den,    The most opportune place, the strongst suggestion,    Our worser genius can shall never melt    Mine honor into lust to take away    The edge of that days celebration    When I shall think, or Phoebus' steeds are foundered,    Or night kept chained below.
Was never mother had so dear a loss.    Alas, I am the mother of these griefs.    Their woes are parceled; mine are general.    She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;    I for a Clarence weep; so doth not she.    These babes for Clarence weep and so do I;    I for an Edward weep; so do not they.    Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed,    Pour all your tears. I am your sorrows nurse,    And I will pamper it with lamentations.
[to RICHARD]  Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
He dies.
Five thousand drops pays that.What yours?and yours?
The little casket bring me hither.
Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen,    We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves    Will in that kingdom spend our following days:    Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.    Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay    To hear the rest untold: sir, lead's the way.
O, I have passed a miserable night,    So full of ugly dreams, of ugly sights,    That, as I am a Christian faithful man,    I would not spend another such a night    Though twere to buy a world of happy days,    So full of dismal terror was the time.
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-laceand a pair of sweet gloves.
Oh, who hath done this deed?
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fearnot, man; here's no harm intended to thee.
I am thus bold to put your Grace in mindOf what you promised me.
I care not:    It is an heretic that makes the fire,    Not she which burns in't.   I'll not call you tyrant;    But this most cruel usage of your queen,    Not able to produce more accusation    Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours    Of tyranny   and will ignoble make you,    Yea, scandalous to the world.
You may go to the devils dam! Your gifts are so good heres none will hold you.   Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together and fast it fairly out.   Our cakes dough on both sides. Farewell.   Yet for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.
No, monster, not I.
I will be brief, for my short date of breath    Is not so long as is a tedious tale.    Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,    And she, there dead, that Romeos faithful wife.    I married them, and their stoln marriage day    Was Tybalts doomsday, whose untimely death    Banished the new-made bridegroom from the city    For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.    You, to remove that siege of grief from her,    Betrothed and would have married her perforce    To County Paris. Then comes she to me,    And with wild looks bid me devise some mean    To rid her from this second marriage,    Or in my cell there would she kill herself.    Then gave I her, so tutored by my art,    A sleeping potion, which so took effect    As I intended, for it wrought on her    The form of death.    Meantime I writ to Romeo,    That he should hither come as this dire night,    To help to take her from her borrowed grave,    Being the time the potions force should cease.    But he which bore my letter, Friar John,    Was stayed by accident, and yesternight    Returned my letter back. Then all alone    At the prefixèd hour of her waking    Came I to take her from her kindreds vault,    Meaning to keep her closely at my cell    Till I conveniently could send to Romeo,    But when I came, some minute ere the time    Of her awakening, here untimely lay    The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.    She wakes, and I entreated her come forth,    And bear this work of heaven with patience.    But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,    And she, too desperate, would not go with me,    But, as it seems, did violence on herself.    All this I know, and to the marriage    Her Nurse is privy.   And if aught in this    Miscarried by my fault, let my old life    Be sacrificed some hour before his time    Unto the rigor of severest law.
By what? By any other house or person?    Of anything the image tell me that    Hath kept with thy remembrance.
[as LUCENTIO]  But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now tis plotted!
Feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady Olivias father took much delight in. He is about the house.
How now? Moody?What is t thou canst demand?
What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.
I shall never begin if I hold my peace.
Still so constant, lord.
A woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis I.Speak with me, pity me, open the door.A beggar begs that never begg'd before.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king,    Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster,    Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood,    Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost    To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,    Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,    Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds.    Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life    I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.    O, cursèd be the hand that made these holes;    Cursèd the heart that had the heart to do it;    Cursèd the blood that let this blood from hence.    More direful hap betide that hated wretch    That makes us wretched by the death of thee    Than I can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads,    Or any creeping venomed thing that lives.    If ever he have child, abortive be it,    Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,    Whose ugly and unnatural aspect    May fright the hopeful mother at the view,    And that be heir to his unhappiness.    If ever he have wife, let her be made    More miserable by the death of him    Than I am made by my poor lord and thee.    Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load,    Taken from Pauls to be interrèd there.
Nay, he will answer the letters master, how he dares, being dared.
Why, this is the world's soul; and just of the    same piece    Is every flatterer's spirit.   Who can call him    His friend that dips in the same dish?   for, in    My knowing, Timon has been this lord's father,    And kept his credit with his purse,    Supported his estate;   nay, Timon's money    Has paid his men their wages: he ne'er drinks,    But Timon's silver treads upon his lip;    And yetO, see the monstrousness of man    When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!    He does deny him, in respect of his,    What charitable men afford to beggars.
What if it come to thee again?
My affectionsAre then most humble. I have no ambitionTo see a goodlier man.
Why will you mew her up,Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hellAnd make her bear the penance of her tongue?
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs, And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Offended us you have not, but the king.
How now, Grumio?
But me more good, to see so great a lordBasely insinuate and send us gifts.
Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass.   So that by my foes,sir I profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends, I am abused.   So that, conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why then the worse for my friends and the better for my foes.
I shall be pinched to death.
[aside to PROSPERO]  Was t well done?
Sirrah, come hither: tis no time to jest,    And therefore frame your manners to the time.    Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,    Puts my apparel and my countenance on,    And I for my escape have put on his;    For in a quarrel since I came ashore    I killed a man and fear I was descried.    Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,    While I make way from hence to save my life.    You understand me?
[within]  A sail, a sail, a sail!
Sweet now, silence.    Juno and Ceres whisper seriously.    Theres something else to do. Hush and be mute,    Or else our spell is marred.
[Reciting to himself]   'When we for recompense have    praised the vile,    It stains the glory in that happy verse    Which aptly sings the good.'
What mean you?
Gentleman, God save thee.
But I can give thee more,    For I will raise her statue in pure gold,    That whiles Verona by that name is known,    There shall no figure at such rate be set    As that of true and faithful Juliet.
That, at her hands, which the kings King forbids.
That would be son to great Antiochus.
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
A contract of eternal bond of love,    Confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands,    Attested by the holy close of lips,    Strengthened by interchangement of your rings,    And all the ceremony of this compact    Sealed in my function, by my testimony,    Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave    I have traveled but two hours.
[t    o  ANTONIO   ]  Ill be with you anon.
If he be credulous and trust my tale,    Ill make him glad to seem Vincentio    And give assurance to Baptista Minola    As if he were the right Vincentio.    Take in your love, and then let me alone.
I think that one of them is hereabout,And cannot make away.
What, in my sight?Bianca, get thee in.
Ho, Helicanus!
By heaven, you do me wrong!
Yes, a dozen, and as many to th' vantage as would storethe world they played for.    But I do think it is their husbands' faults    If wives do fall.   Say that they slack their duties    And pour our treasures into foreign laps,    Or else break out in peevish jealousies,    Throwing restraint upon us.   Or say they strike us,    Or scant our former having in despite.    Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,    Yet have we some revenge.   Let husbands know    Their wives have sense like them. They see and smell    And have their palates both for sweet and sour,    As husbands have.   What is it that they do    When they change us for others? Is it sport?    I think it is. And doth affection breed it?    I think it doth. Is t frailty that thus errs?    It is so too. And have not we affections,    Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?    Then let them use us well, else let them know,    The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.
That was in thy rage.    Speak it again and, even with the word,    This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love,    Shall for thy love kill a far truer love.    To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.
I will go seek him.Cassio, walk hereabout.    If I do find him fit, Ill move your suit    And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
My lord, here is my bill.
'Twas you we laughed at.
Why, this is very midsummer madness.
Its the wind.
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.    The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post.    There, at your meetest vantage of the time,    Infer the bastardy of Edwards children.    Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen    Only for saying he would make his son    Heir to the Crownmeaning indeed his house,    Which, by the sign thereof, was termèd so.    Moreover, urge his hateful luxury    And bestial appetite in change of lust,    Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,    Even where his raging eye or savage heart,    Without control, lusted to make his prey.    Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:    Tell them when that my mother went with child    Of that insatiate Edward,   noble York    My princely father then had wars in France,    And, by true computation of the time,    Found that the issue was not his begot,    Which well appearèd in his lineaments,    Being nothing like the noble duke my father.    Yet touch this sparingly, as twere far off,    Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.
You see this fellow that is gone before,    He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar    And give direction.   And do but see his vice,    'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,    The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of him.    I fear the trust Othello puts him in    On some odd time of his infirmity    Will shake this island.
He hath confessed.
The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
Relent? No. 'Tis cowardly and womanish.
A flourish, trumpets! Strike alarum, drums! Let not the heavens hear these telltale womenRail on the Lords anointed. Strike, I say!
Will it be ever thus?   Ungracious wretch,    Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,    Where manners ne'er were preachd!   Out of my sight!    Be not offended, dear Cesario.    Rudesby, be gone!
M. But then there is no consonancy in the sequel.    That suffers under probation. A should follow but O does.
Ay, that's my boy! thy father hath full oftFor his ungrateful country done the like.
And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,For which I wait for money.
[Aside to SAMPSON]  No.
(  aside  ) And with what wing the staniel checks at it!
My other self, my councils consistory,    My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin,    I, as a child, will go by thy direction    Toward Ludlow then, for well not stay behind.
Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand.
Yonder comes a poet and a painter: the plague of    company light upon thee!   I will fear to catch it    and give way: when I know not what else to do, I'll    see thee again.
First know thou, I begot him on the empress.
And as he saith, so say we all with him.
Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! Thieves! Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!Thieves! thieves!
If he say so, may his pernicious soul    Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th' heart.    She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
Noble Ventidius! Well;    I am not of that feather to shake off    My friend when he must need me.   I do know him    A gentleman that well deserves a help:    Which he shall have: I'll pay the debt,    and free him.
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise    And dangerous success of bloody wars    As I intend more good to you and yours    Than ever you or yours were by me harmed!
Mistress, what cheer?
Who made thee then a bloody ministerWhen gallant-springing, brave Plantagenet, That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
God in heaven bless her!You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
[taking his hand]   Now, sir, thought is free.   I pray you, bring your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.
But she received my dog?
To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,    For it was sometime target to a king;    I know it by this mark.   He loved me dearly,    And for his sake I wish the having of it;    And that you'ld guide me to your sovereign's court,    Where with it I may appear a gentleman;    And if that ever my low fortune's better,    I'll pay your bounties; till then rest your debtor.
I will not stay to offend you.
Orsino, this is that Antonio    That took the    Phoenix    and her fraught from Candy,    And this is he that did the    Tiger    board    When your young nephew Titus lost his leg.    Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,    In private brabble did we apprehend him.
I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment and reason.
[aside to the other attendants]  The king is angry. See, he gnaws his lip.
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?    Bianca, stand aside.Poor girl, she weeps!    [To BIANCA]   Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.    [To KATHERINE]   For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit!    Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?    When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Is this your speeding? Nay, then, good night our part.
Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discernst thou aught in that? Is he not honest?
[offering him the crown]     Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.    Lo, here this long-usurpèd royalty    From the dead temples of this bloody wretch    Have I plucked off, to grace thy brows withal.    Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Her honor is an essence thats not seen,They have it very oft that have it not.But for the handkerchief
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
Hes now in Florence.
Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is thisWhich dances with your daughter?
Oh, Oh, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
Well not run, Monsieur Monster.
Silence! One word more    Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What,    An advocate for an imposter?   Hush,    Thou thinkst there is no more such shapes as he,    Having seen but him and Caliban.   Foolish wench,    To th' most of men this is a Caliban    And they to him are angels.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalts death,    And therefore have I little talked of love,    For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.    Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous    That she do give her sorrow so much sway,    And in his wisdom hastes our marriage    To stop the inundation of her tears    Which, too much minded by herself alone,    May be put from her by society.    Now do you know the reason of this haste.
[reads]    By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it.   Though you have put me into darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefitof my senses as well as your Ladyship.   I have your own letter that induced me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt not but to do myself much right or youmuch shame.   Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little unthought of and speak out of my injury. The madly used Malvolio.
This is the man. Do thy office.
Madam!
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
What is his name?
Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.
O let no noble eye profane a tear    For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear:    As confident as is the falcon's flight    Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.    My loving lord, I take my leave of you;    Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;    Not sick, although I have to do with death,    But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.    Lo, as at English feasts, so I regret    The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:    O thou, the earthly author of my blood,    Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,    Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up    To reach at victory above my head,    Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers;    And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,    That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,    And furnish new the name of John a Gaunt,    Even in the lusty havior of his son.
All happiness to your honour!
Yet banishèd? Hang up philosophy!    Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,    Displant a town, reverse a princes doom,    It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
O my most sacred lady!    Temptations have since then been born to's; for    In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;    Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes    Of my young play-fellow.
Get on your cloak, and haste you to Lord Timon;    Importune him for my moneys; be not ceased    With slight denial, nor then silenced when    'Commend me to your master'and the cap    Plays in the right hand, thus:   but tell him,    My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn    Out of mine own; his days and times are past    And my reliances on his fracted dates    Have smit my credit:   I love and honour him,    But must not break my back to heal his finger;    Immediate are my needs, and my relief    Must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words,    But find supply immediate.   Get you gone:    Put on a most importunate aspect,    A visage of demand; for, I do fear,    When every feather sticks in his own wing,    Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,    Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.
[to PRINCE]  What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
For what, I pray thee?
I will not leave him now till CassioBe called to him.How is t with you, my lord?
Now, mild may be thy life!    For a more blustrous birth had never babe:    Quiet and gentle thy conditions!   for    Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world    That ever was prince's child. Happy what follows!    Thou hast as chiding a nativity    As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make,    To herald thee from the womb:   even at the first    Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit,    With all thou canst find here. Now, the good gods    Throw their best eyes upon't!
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace    As 'longeth to a lovers blessèd case!    Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,    And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
From all dishonesty he can: in this,Unless he take the course that you have done,Commit me for committing honour, trust it,He shall not rule me.
Pray you now, buy it.
I'll force thee yield to my desire.
God make your Majesty joyful, as you have been.
He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.    I'll dive into the burning lake below,    And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.    Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we    No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size;    But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,    Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear:    And, sith there's no justice in earth nor hell,    We will solicit heaven and move the gods    To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs.    Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, Marcus;
No, nor of any shores:Yet I was mortally brought forth, and amNo other than I appear.
[kneeling]  A boon, my sovereign, for my service done.
We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on.
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.
Whats that to us? The time goes by. Away!
My lord,    Before I freely speak my mind herein,    You shall not only take the sacrament    To bury mine intents, but also to effect    Whatever I shall happen to devise.    I see your brows are full of discontent,    Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:    Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay    A plot shall show us all a merry day.
No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things. Well, heavens above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
See, she will speak to him.
Youd be king o' th' isle, sirrah?
Should dying men flatter with those that live?
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Both by myself and many other friends.    But he, his own affections counselor,    Is to himselfI will not say how true,    But to himself so secret and so close,    So far from sounding and discovery,    As is the bud bit with an envious worm,    Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,    Or dedicate his beauty to the same.    Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.    We would as willingly give cure as know.
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth. Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
Confined together    In the same fashion as you gave in charge,    Just as you left them, all prisoners, sir,    In the line grove which weather-fends your cell.    They cannot budge till your release. The king,    His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted,    And the remainder mourning over them,    Brimful of sorrow and dismay.   But chiefly    Him that you termed, sir, the good old Lord Gonzalo,    His tears run down his beard like winters drops    From eaves of reeds.   Your charm so strongly works 'em    That if you now beheld them, your affections    Would become tender.
[to TRINCULO]    How didst thou scape? How camest thou hither? Swear by this bottle how thou camest hither.   I escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which I made of the bark of atree with mine own hands since I was cast ashore.
What said our cousin when you parted with him?
Good day at once.
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
She makes our profession as it were to stink aforethe face of the gods.
I not purpose it.I think, Camillo?
Ladies! what are their wills?
The third of Antioch;And his device, a wreath of chivalry;The word, 'Me pompae provexit apex.'
Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
Within the infant rind of this small flower    Poison hath residence and medicine power.    For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;    Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.    Two such opposèd kings encamp them still,    In man as well as herbsgrace and rude will.    And where the worser is predominant,    Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
[as LUCENTIO]  Fear you not him.Sirrah Biondello,Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.Imagine twere the right Vincentio.
I prithee, peace. My soul is full of sorrow.
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
Rome will despise her for this foul escape.
What then?
It is a kind of history.
[aside]    With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!    To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,    He prettily and aptly taunts himself.    So cunning and so young is wonderful.
Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
[to GONZALO]  I prithee, spare.
[aside]  It goes on, I see,As my soul prompts it. Spirit, fine spirit! Ill free theeWithin two days for this.
Who knows the Lord Protectors mind herein?Who is most inward with the noble duke?
Give me thy hand. I am sorry I beat thee. But while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:    His noble cousin is right welcome hither;    And all the number of his fair demands    Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction:    With all the gracious utterance thou hast    Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.  We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,    To look so poorly and to speak so fair?    Shall we call back Northumberland, and send    Defiance to the traitor, and so die?
O my lord,    You only speak from your distracted soul;    There is not so much left, to furnish out    A moderate table.
This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot,    The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock    That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court;    And who should find them but the empress' villain?    She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not choose    But give them to his master for a present.
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count    That died some twelvemonth since,   then leaving her    In the protection of his son, her brother,    Who shortly also died,   for whose dear love,    They say, she hath abjured the company    And sight of men.
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellentgood clothes: there's no further necessity ofqualities can make her be refused.
May these add to the number that may scald thee!    Let moulten coin be thy damnation,    Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!    Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,    It turns in less than two nights?   O you gods,    I feel master's passion! this slave,    Unto his honour, has my lord's meat in him:    Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,    When he is turn'd to poison?    O, may diseases only work upon't!    And, when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature    Which my lord paid for, be of any power    To expel sickness, but prolong his hour!
If not, let me see thee a servant still.
To serve me well, you all should do me duty: Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects.O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
Let's make no stay.
These differences shall all rest under gage    Till Norfolk be repeal'd:   repeal'd he shall be,    And, though mine enemy, restored again    To all his lands and signories:     when he's return'd,    Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambsAnd throw them in the entrails of the wolf?When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion ofmen, and remain a beast with the beasts?
So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so shakes, and pulls me! Ha, ha, ha!
How dare the plants look up to heaven, from whenceThey have their nourishment?
Very sweet and contagious, i' faith.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford. Farewell, dear father.
[sings]    O mistress mine, where are you roaming?    O, stay and hear! Your true loves coming,    That can sing both high and low:    Trip no further, pretty sweeting.    Journeys end in lovers meeting,    Every wise mans son doth know.
Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.
Had she such power,She had just cause.
We make woe wanton with this fond delay:Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.
Give me your hand, sir.
O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son,    For that I was his father Edward's son;    That blood already, like the pelican,    Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused:    My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,    Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!    May be a precedent and witness good    That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood:    Join with the present sickness that I have;    And thy unkindness be like crooked age,    To crop at once a too long wither'd flower.    Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!    These words hereafter thy tormentors be!    Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:    Love they to live that love and honour have.
Good my lord, forbear:The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your ownWith oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
Who is t that cried?
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.  [He bites his thumb]
And till she come, as truly as to heaven    I do confess the vices of my blood    So justly to your grave ears   Ill present    How I did thrive in this fair ladys love    And she in mine.
Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends. Marry, now I let go your hand, I am barren.
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
(  aside  ) And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
O, let me stay,And comfort you, my master.
How now, old lad?
Well, well see t. Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip. We shall ne'er be younger.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      In all which time, you and your husband Grey    Were factious for the house of Lancaster.    And, Rivers, so were you.   Was not your husband    In Margarets battle at Saint Albans slain?    Let me put in your minds, if you forget,    What you have been ere this, and what you are;    Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
Oh yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face    Such as the daughter of Agenor had,    That made great Jove to humble him to her hand    When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.
I will in Cassios lodging lose this napkin    And let him find it. Trifles light as air    Are to the jealous confirmations strong    As proofs of holy writ.   This may do something.    The Moor already changes with my poison.    Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons    Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,    But with a little act upon the blood    Burn like the mines of sulfur.
You have said, sir. To see this age!   A sentence is buta cheveril glove to a good wit. How quickly the wrong side may be turned outward!
Y'are a baggage, the Slys are no rogues. Look in the chronicleswe came in with Richard Conqueror. Therefore  paucas pallabris  : let the world slide. Sessa!
Oh, I am slain!
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.    [Takes them from BALTHASAR]    Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning    See thou deliver it to my lord and father.    [Gives letter to BALTHASAR]    Give me the light.    [Takes torch from BALTHASAR]    Upon thy life I charge thee,    Whateer thou hearst or seest, stand all aloof,    And do not interrupt me in my course.    Why I descend into this bed of death    Is partly to behold my ladys face,    But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger    A precious ring, a ring that I must use    In dear employment.   Therefore hence, be gone.    But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry    In what I farther shall intend to do,    By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint    And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.    The time and my intents are savage, wild,    More fierce and more inexorable far    Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,    And offer me disguised in sober robes    To old Baptista as a schoolmaster    Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,    That so I may, by this device at least,    Have leave and leisure to make love to her    And, unsuspected, court her by herself.
By the hour of nine.
I pray, let them be admitted.
Lucentio, gentle sir.
God bless your Grace with health and happy days.
When I wore it at your daughters marriage?
Theyre busy within. You were best knock louder.
His answer was, he would unto the stews,    And from the common'st creature pluck a glove,    And wear it as a favour;   and with that    He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.
Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
You advise me well.
(  seizi    ng  SEBASTIAN)  Come on, sir, hold!
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Head and butt! An hasty-witted bodyWould say your head and butt were head and horn.
I am bound to you:There is some sap in this.
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
Had you such leisure in the time of death To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?
Thus I conceive by him.
What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.
No, uncle, but our crosses on the way Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.I want more uncles here to welcome me.
What advocate hast thou to him?
It were well    The general were put in mind of it.    Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature    Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio    And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?
For me, be you thoughten    That I came with no ill intent; for to me    The very doors and windows savour vilely.    Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue, and    I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.    Hold, here's more gold for thee.    A curse upon him, die he like a thief,    That robs thee of thy goodness!   If thou dost    Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.
Hoyday, a riddle! Neither good nor bad.    What needst thou run so many mile about    When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way?    Once more, what news?
Where my stomach finds meat; or, rather, where I eatit.
Who knows not he is dead! Who knows he is?
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,    I never thought it possible or likely.    But see, while idly I stood looking on,    I found the effect of love in idleness    And now in plainness do confess to thee    That art to me as secret and as dear    As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was,    Tranio,   I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,    If I achieve not this young modest girl.    Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst.    Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Valentine!
I am right glad that his health is well, sir: andwhat hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?
Ay, just; a verse in Horace; right, you have it.   [Aside]     Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!    Here's no sound jest! the old man hath found their guilt;    And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines,    That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.    But were our witty empress well afoot,    She would applaud Andronicus' conceit:    But let her rest in her unrest awhile.    And now, young lords, was't not a happy star    Led us to Rome, strangers, and more than so,    Captives, to be advanced to this height?    It did me good, before the palace gate    To brave the tribune in his brother's hearing.
Believe me, sister, of all the men aliveI never yet beheld that special faceWhich I could fancy more than any other.
And enter in our ears like great triumphersIn their applauding gates.
Mine honest friend,I prithee, but repair to me next morning.
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired    And thus expiring do foretell of him:    His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,    For violent fires soon burn out themselves;    Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;    He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;    With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder:    Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,    Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.    This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,    This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,    This other Eden, demi-paradise,    This fortress built by Nature for herself    Against infection and the hand of war,    This happy breed of men, this little world,    This precious stone set in the silver sea,    Which serves it in the office of a wall,    Or as a moat defensive to a house,    Against the envy of less happier lands,    This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,    This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,    Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth,    Renowned for their deeds as far from home,    For Christian service and true chivalry,    As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,    Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son,    This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,    Dear for her reputation through the world,    Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,    Like to a tenement or pelting farm:    England, bound in with the triumphant sea    Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege    Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,    With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:    That England, that was wont to conquer others,    Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.    Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,    How happy then were my ensuing death!
He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar.
Indeed, they are disproportioned.My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
We are very sorry fort.
And this my neighbour too?
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master,That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty longTo tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
What, in the midst of the street?
Behold him.
Lucius, save the child,    And bear it from me to the empress.    If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things,    That highly may advantage thee to hear:    If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,    I'll speak no more but 'Vengeance rot you all!'
He does me double wrong    That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.    Discharge my followers: let them hence away,    From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.
Art thou Timandra?
And wished to see thee cross-gartered.
Ay, the womans maid of the house.
They vanished strangely.
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?    It must be great that can inherit us    So much as of a thought of ill in him.
To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:    But let him say so then, and let him go;    But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,    We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.    Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure    The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia    You take my lord, I'll give him my commission    To let him there a month behind the gest    Prefix'd for's parting:   yet, good deed, Leontes,    I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind    What lady-she her lord.   You'll stay?
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,    three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made    themselves all men of hair,   they call themselves    Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches    say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are    not in't;   but they themselves are o' the mind, if it    be not too rough for some that know little but    bowling, it will please plentifully.
A nest of traitors!
O, go to. Well, well,Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the godsDo like this worst.
Do not swear at all.Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,Which is the god of my idolatry, And Ill believe thee.
The handkerchief!
[giving money]  Theres for thy pains.
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
A guiltless death I die.
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen, I would begood to thee.
Awaked you not in this sore agony?
[Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.
Noble and young,    When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,    Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,    We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm,    To wipe out our ingratitude with loves    Above their quantity.
After him I love    More than I love these eyes, more than my life,    More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.    If I do feign, you witnesses above,    Punish my life for tainting of my love!
Now must I to the monument alone.    Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.    She will beshrew me much that Romeo    Hath had no notice of these accidents.    But I will write again to Mantua,    And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.    Poor living corpse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
I am changed.
Alas, she has no speech!
By heaven, I think there is no man is secure    But the queens kindred and night-walking heralds    That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.    Heard ye not what an humble suppliant    Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?
O most dear mistress,The sun will set before I shall dischargeWhat I must strive to do.
Ay, thats the theme.To her in haste. Give her this jewel. SayMy love can give no place, bide no denay.  [he hands her a jewel]
'Tis a good piece.
You, you, ay, you!We have done our course. Theres money for your pains.I pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.
So it appears by that I have to say. First, he commends him to your noble self.
The house will be the quieter.
'Tis with cares.
Then say they were not slain. But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.
If there be such a dart in princes' frowns,How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,    Call me before the exactest auditors    And set me on the proof.   So the gods bless me,    When all our offices have been oppress'd    With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept    With drunken spilth of wine, when every room    Hath blazed with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy,    I have retired me to a wasteful cock,    And set mine eyes at flow.
'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks And past.
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us?
What hast thou found?
Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
We had the tune on't a month ago.
Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.
Out upon you! What a man are you?
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged! Give me my sin again.
[sings]    Come away, come away, death,    And in sad cypress let me be laid.    Fly away, fly away breath,    I am slain by a fair cruel maid.    My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,    O, prepare it!    My part of death, no one so true    Did share it.    Not a flower, not a flower sweet    On my black coffin let there be strown.    Not a friend, not a friend greet    My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown.    A thousand thousand sighs to save,    Lay me, O, where    Sad true lover never find my grave,    To weep there!
Right, I mean you.
Go sleep, and hear us.
What am I, sir! Nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods! O fine villain!   A silken doublet, a velvet hose, ascarlet cloak, and a copatain hat! Oh, I am undone, I am undone!   While I play the good husband at home, my sonand my servant spend all at the university.
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter.    I would to God all strifes were well compounded.    My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness    To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
I have no exquisite reason for t, but I have reason good enough.
Villainous whore!
I wonder on't; he was wont to shine at seven.
Come not to me again: but say to Athens,    Timon hath made his everlasting mansion    Upon the beached verge of the salt flood;    Who once a day with his embossed froth    The turbulent surge shall cover:   thither come,    And let my grave-stone be your oracle.    Lips, let sour words go by and language end:    What is amiss plague and infection mend!    Graves only be men's works and death their gain!    Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.  [Gives ROMEO JULIETs ring]   Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
Though I am satisfied and need no more    Than what I know, yet shall the oracle    Give rest to the minds of others, such as he    Whose ignorant credulity will not    Come up to the truth.   So have we thought it good    From our free person she should be confined,    Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence    Be left her to perform.   Come, follow us;    We are to speak in public; for this business    Will raise us all.
O master, master, I have watched so long    That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied    An ancient angel coming down the hill    Will serve the turn.
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.
Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.
[Takes the money]  This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
MMalvolio. Mwhy, that begins my name.
I do not know. I am sure I am none such.
He would not stay at your petitions: madeHis business more material.
Fortunate mistress,let my prophecy    Come home to ye!   you must retire yourself    Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat    And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,    Dismantle you, and, as you can,   disliken    The truth of your own seeming; that you may    For I do fear eyes overto shipboard    Get undescried.
Wert thou not banishèd on pain of death?
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,Hath sent a letter to his fathers house.
What, art thou afraid?
Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;But by my coming I have made you happy.
'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,And urged it twice together, did he not?
You're a made old man: if the sins of your youthare forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers    That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,    Now cheer each other in each others love.    Though we have spent our harvest of this king,    We are to reap the harvest of his son.    The broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates,    But lately splintered, knit, and joined together,    Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept.    Meseemeth good that with some little train    Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet    Hither to London, to be crowned our king.
Saw you no more? Marked you not how her sisterBegan to scold and raise up such a stormThat mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
The best, for the innocence.
Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!    How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants    This night englutted! Who is not Timon's?    What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is    Lord Timon's?    Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!    Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,    The breath is gone whereof this praise is made:    Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter showers,    These flies are couch'd.
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you    That by your virtuous means I may again    Exist, and be a member of his love    Whom I, with all the office of my heart    Entirely honor.   I would not be delayed.    If my offence be of such mortal kind    That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,    Nor purposed merit in futurity,    Can ransom me into his love again,    But to know so must be my benefit.    So shall I clothe me in a forced content,    And shut myself up in some other course,    To fortunes alms.
You are married?
I call thee not.
My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon;Your letter is with Jupiter by this.
I go.
This is the old man still.
'Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them.    But since my master and mistress have bought you,    there's no going but by their consent:   therefore I    will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I    doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough.    Come, I'll do for thee what I can; come your ways.
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.
Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage,   and, for turning away, let summer bear it out.
And all those sayings will I overswear;    And those swearings keep as true in soul    As doth that orbèd continent the fire    That severs day from night.
One only daughter have I, no kin else,    On whom I may confer what I have got:    The maid is fair, o' the youngest for a bride,    And I have bred her at my dearest cost    In qualities of the best.  This man of thineAttempts her love: I prithee, noble lord,Join with me to forbid him her resort;Myself have spoke in vain.
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
Thats my noble master!What shall I do? Say, what? What shall I do?
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple.
What is the matter, ho? Who is t that cried?
Since what I am to say must be but that    Which contradicts my accusation and    The testimony on my part no other    But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me    To say 'not guilty:'   mine integrity    Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,    Be so received.   But thus: if powers divine    Behold our human actions, as they do,    I doubt not then but innocence shall make    False accusation blush and tyranny    Tremble at patience.   You, my lord, best know,    Who least will seem to do so, my past life    Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,    As I am now unhappy;   which is more    Than history can pattern, though devised    And play'd to take spectators.   For behold me    A fellow of the royal bed (which owe    A moiety of the throne), a great king's daughter,    The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing    To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore    Who please to come and hear.   For life, I prize it    As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,    'Tis a derivative from me to mine,    And only that I stand for.   I appeal    To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes    Came to your court, how I was in your grace,    How merited to be so;   since he came,    With what encounter so uncurrent I    Have strain'd to appear thus:   i   f one jot beyond    The bound of honour, or in act or will    That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts    Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin    Cry fie upon my grave!
Then as my gift and thine own acquisition    Worthily purchased, take my daughter.   But    If thou dost break her virgin knot before    All sanctimonious ceremonies may    With full and holy rite be ministered,    No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall    To make this contract grow, but barren hate,    Sour-eyed disdain,   and discord shall bestrew    The union of your bed with weeds so loathly    That you shall hate it both.   Therefore take heed,    As Hymens lamps shall light you.
In what you please: I'll do what I can.
But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a manas you.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
Worse and worse!
Shall I be heard?
We would purge the land of these drones, that robthe bee of her honey.
My lord
What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,    Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.    Susan and sheGod rest all Christian souls!    Were of an age.   Well, Susan is with God.    She was too good for me. But, as I said,    On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.    That shall she.   Marry, I remember it well.    Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,    And she was weanedI never shall forget it    Of all the days of the year, upon that day.    For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,    Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.    My lord and you were then at Mantua.    Nay, I do bear a brain.   But, as I said,    When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple    Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,    To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!    Shake! quoth the dovehouse. Twas no need, I trow,    To bid me trudge.    And since that time it is eleven years,    For then she could stand alone.   Nay, by the rood,    She could have run and waddled all about,    For even the day before, she broke her brow.    And then my husbandGod be with his soul!    He was a merry mantook up the child.    Yea, quoth he, Dost thou fall upon thy face?    Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,    Wilt thou not, Jule?   and, by my holy dame,    The pretty wretch left crying and said ay.    To see now, how a jest shall come about!    I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,    I never should forget it. Wilt thou not, Jule? quoth he.    And, pretty fool, it stinted and said ay.
Pray you lead on. At every house Ill call.    I may command at most.Get weapons, ho!    And raise some special officers of might.    On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.
His name! As if I knew not his name! I have brought himup ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
O, teach me how I should forget to think!
It wears, sir, as it grows.
O your sweet queen!That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither,To have bless'd mine eyes with her!
I make a broken delivery of the business; but the    changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were    very notes of admiration:   they seemed almost, with    staring on one another, to tear the cases of their    eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language    in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard    of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable    passion of wonder appeared in them;   but the wisest    beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not    say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the    extremity of the one, it must needs be.    [Enter another Gentleman]    Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.    The news, Rogero?
Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
Ratcliffe, my lord, tis I. The early village cockHath twice done salutation to the morn.Your friends are up and buckle on their armor.
Then thus I turn me from my country's light,    To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
Good night, Penthesilea.
Let her hang me. He that is well hanged in this world needs to fear no colors.
God save you, sir.
Fear not, my lord, but think    Your grace, that fed my country with your corn,    For which the people's prayers still fall upon you,    Must in your child be thought on.   If neglection    Should therein make me vile, the common body,    By you relieved, would force me to my duty:    But if to that my nature need a spur,    The gods revenge it upon me and mine,    To the end of generation!
My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.
I'll believe him as an enemy, and give over my trade.
So youre paid.
Why, by making him uncapable of Othellos place: knocking out his brains.
Do me some service, ere I come to thee.    Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder stands;    Now give me some surance that thou art Revenge,    Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot-wheels;    And then I'll come and be thy waggoner,    And whirl along with thee about the globe.    Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,    To hale thy vengeful waggon swift away,    And find out murderers in their guilty caves:    And when thy car is loaden with their heads,    I will dismount, and by the waggon-wheel    Trot, like a servile footman, all day long,    Even from Hyperion's rising in the east    Until his very downfall in the sea:    And day by day I'll do this heavy task,    So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
[aside]  Hover about her; say that right for rightHath dimmed your infant morn to agèd night.
A greater gift than that Ill give my cousin.
Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor,    This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil;    Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him    Till he be brought unto the empress' face,    For testimony of her foul proceedings:    And see the ambush of our friends be strong;    I fear the emperor means no good to us.
[as LITIO]  Madam, my instruments in tune.
Yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him.    Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Here's to thee.
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.    The next news is, I have to London sent    The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:    The manner of their taking may appear    At large discoursed in this paper here.
We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun,    And bleat the one at the other:   what we changed    Was innocence for innocence; we knew not    The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd    That any did.   Had we pursued that life,    And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd    With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven    Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd    Hereditary ours.
The king my father did in Tarsus leave me;    Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife,    Did seek to murder me:   and having woo'd    A villain to attempt it, who having drawn to do't,    A crew of pirates came and rescued me;    Brought me to Mytilene.   But, good sir,    Whither will you have me? Why do you weep?    It may be,    You think me an impostor: no, good faith;    I am the daughter to King Pericles,    If good King Pericles be.
Come hither, knight. Come hither, Fabian. Well whispero'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.
Give me a living reason shes disloyal.
Here, wear this jewel for me. 'Tis my picture.    Refuse it not. It hath no tongue to vex you.    And I beseech you come again tomorrow.    What shall you ask of me that Ill deny,    That honor, saved, may upon asking give?
He last asked the question. Poor rogues, andusurers' men! bawds between gold and want!
What, what! the lustful sons of TamoraPerformers of this heinous, bloody deed?
Stay, murderous villains! will you kill your brother?    Now, by the burning tapers of the sky,    That shone so brightly when this boy was got,    He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point    That touches this my first-born son and heir!    I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,    With all his threatening band of Typhon's brood,    Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,    Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.    What, what, ye sanguine, shallow-hearted boys!    Ye white-limed walls! ye alehouse painted signs!    Coal-black is better than another hue,    In that it scorns to bear another hue;    For all the water in the ocean    Can never turn the swan's black legs to white,    Although she lave them hourly in the flood.    Tell the empress from me, I am of age    To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.
Nay, you must forget that.
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge. Use careful watch. Choose trusty sentinels.
I do not sue to stand;Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
The cockerel.
Petruchio is my name, Antonios son,A man well known throughout all Italy.
O, twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
She thanks you.
Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
How now! who is it?
[   aside]    Why speaks my father so ungently? This    Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first    That e'er I sighed for.   Pity move my father    To be inclined my way!
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, nowI am for you again: pray you, sit by us,And tell 's a tale.
Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?
Then westward ho!Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship!Youll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
This Tarsus, o'er which I have the government,    A city on whom plenty held full hand,    For riches strew'd herself even in the streets;    Whose towers bore heads so high they kiss'd the clouds,    And strangers ne'er beheld but wondered at;    Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn'd,    Like one another's glass to trim them by:    Their tables were stored full, to glad the sight,    And not so much to feed on as delight;    All poverty was scorn'd, and pride so great,    The name of help grew odious to repeat.
The news is very fair and good, my lord:Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy. Go to thy coldbed and warm thee.
In her chamber,    Making a sermon of continency to her,    And rails and swears and rates, that she, poor soul,    Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,    And sits as one new-risen from a dream.    Away, away, for he is coming hither!
The hours now come.    The very minute bids thee ope thine ear.    Obey and be attentive.   Canst thou remember    A time before we came unto this cell?    I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not    Out three years old.
I know him well. You are welcome for his sake.
I strike quickly, being moved.
Save you, gentleman.
Thats as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
Master, master, look about you. Who goes there, ha?
And so have I, boy.
Than men their minds! 'Tis true.    O heaven! Were man    But constant, he were perfect.   That one error    Fills him with faults; makes him run through all the sins:    Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.    What is in Silvia's face, but I may spy    More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?
I dare not, sir.    My master knows not but I am gone hence,    And fearfully did menace me with death    If I did stay to look on his intents.
You are like one that superstitiouslyDoth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies:But yet I know you'll do as I advise.
[reads]  I may command where I adore, But silence, like a Lucrece knife,With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore;M.O.A.I. doth sway my life.
(  sings  )  But I will never die.
Then here is a supplication for you. And when you    come to him, at the first approach you must kneel,    then kiss his foot, then deliver up your pigeons,   and    then look for your reward. I'll be at hand, sir; see    you do it bravely.
Come, sirrah, you must be hanged.
Why, how should she be murdered?
You are i' the right, sir, tis for my mistress.
I saw thee late at the Count Orsinos.
It is a quarrel just and reasonableTo be revenged on him that killed my husband.
I would with such perfection govern, sir,T' excel the Golden Age.
A pillow for his head:    So, leave him all.   Well, my companion friends,    If this but answer to my just belief,    I'll well remember you.
And that would she for twenty thousand more.
Welcome, you!How now, you?What, you!Fellow, you!And thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
Oh, behold,    The riches of the ship is come on shore!    You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.    Hail to thee, lady, and the grace of heaven,    Before, behind thee, and on every hand,    Enwheel thee round!
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
Such wind as scatters young men through the world    To seek their fortunes farther than at home,    Where small experience grows.   But in a few,    Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:    Antonio, my father, is deceased,    And I have thrust myself into this maze,    Happily to wive and thrive as best I may.    Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,    And so am come abroad to see the world.
Well, I have done. But yet
Go, you cot-quean, go.Get you to bed, faith. Youll be sick tomorrowFor this nights watching.
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,    Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,    So many summers dry; scarce any joy    Did ever so long live; no sorrow    But kill'd itself much sooner.
Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong,And I will be revenged on them all.
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,And for your Grace, and yours, my gracious lords.
Excellent. It hangs like flax on a distaff.   And I hopeto see a housewife take thee between her legs and spin it off.
The heavens forbidBut that our loves and comforts should increase,Even as our days do grow.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.    Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,    An hour but married, Tybalt murderèd,    Doting like me, and like me banishèd,    Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair    And fall upon the ground, as I do now,    Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well.I am a gentleman.
Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.
Thou hast sworn it more to me:Then whither goest? say, whither?
I have no great devotion to the deed    And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.    'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword: he dies.
O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
I hope thou wilt.
Give me.  [reads]  Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.
[as CAMBIO]  Sir, give him head; I know hell prove a jade.
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Why, villain, art not thou the carrier?
They have not been commanded, mighty king.    Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,    Ill muster up my friends and meet your Grace    Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
A solemn air and the best comforter    To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains,    Now useless, boiled within thy skull. There stand,    For you are spell-stopped.    Holy Gonzalo, honorable man,    Mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine,    Fall fellowly drops.   The charm dissolves apace,    And as the morning steals upon the night,    Melting the darkness, so their rising senses    Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle    Their clearer reason.     O good Gonzalo,    My true preserver and a loyal sir    To him you followst, I will pay thy graces    Home both in word and deed.     Most cruelly    Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter.    Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.    Thou art pinched for t now, Sebastian.   Flesh and blood,    You brother mine, that entertained ambition,    Expelled remorse and nature, whom, with Sebastian,    Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong,    Would here have killed your kingI do forgive thee,    Unnatural though thou art.   Their understanding    Begins to swell, and the approaching tide    Will shortly fill the reasonable shore    That now lies foul and muddy.   Not one of them    That yet looks on me, or would know me.   Ariel,    Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell.    I will discase me, and myself present    As I was sometime Milan. Quickly, spirit.    Thou shalt ere long be free.
He is.
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?    This torture should be roared in dismal hell.    Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but ay,    And that bare vowel I shall poison more    Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.    I am not I if there be such an I,    Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer ay.    If he be slain, say ay, or if not, no.    Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.
[giving a coin]  Thou shalt not be the worse for me: theres gold.
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,I would appeach him.
Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools!
A fortnight and odd days.
Mark'd he your music?
Or stole it, rather.
Say it, Othello.
Nay, I am for all waters.
Gramercies, lad, go forward. This contents.The rest will comfort, for thy counsels sound.
What handkerchief?
Yes, I intend so.
No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess,Upon the like devotion as yourselves, To gratulate the gentle princes there.
Whats the matter?
O brave monster! Lead the way.
Bless us!
Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee:    Welcome, dread Fury, to my woful house:    Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.    How like the empress and her sons you are!    Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor:    Could not all hell afford you such a devil?    For well I wot the empress never wags    But in her company there is a Moor;    And, would you represent our queen aright,    It were convenient you had such a devil:    But welcome, as you are. What shall we do?
Tut, shes a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!    Ill tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest    Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,    Ay, by gogs wouns!   quoth he, and swore so loud    That, all amazed, the priest let fall the book,    And as he stooped again to take it up,    The mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff    That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.    Now take them up, quoth he, if any list.
I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, andI'll have done presently.
Sir, in Argier.
As snow in harvest. Come, you deceive yourself.'Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.
When Prospero is destroyed.
Do any thing but this thou doest. Empty    Old receptacles, or common shores, of filth;    Serve by indenture to the common hangman:    Any of these ways are yet better than this;    For what thou professest, a baboon, could he speak,    Would own a name too dear.   O, that the gods    Would safely deliver me from this place!    Here, here's gold for thee.    If that thy master would gain by thee,    Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance,    With other virtues, which I'll keep from boast:    And I will undertake all these to teach.    I doubt not but this populous city will    Yield many scholars.
Look you, I love you well; I'll give you gold,    Rid me these villains from your companies:    Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,    Confound them by some course, and come to me,    I'll give you gold enough.
O, but one word.  [speaks quietly to ANTONIO]
I pray thee, let me look on that again.
How wear the garland? Dost thou mean the crown?
Consumptions sow    In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,    And mar men's spurring.   Crack the lawyer's voice,    That he may never more false title plead,    Nor sound his quillets shrilly: hoar the flamen,    That scolds against the quality of flesh,    And not believes himself:   down with the nose,    Down with it flat; take the bridge quite away    Of him that, his particular to foresee,    Smells from the general weal: make curl'd-pate    ruffians bald;    And let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war    Derive some pain from you:   plague all;    That your activity may defeat and quell    The source of all erection. There's more gold:    Do you damn others, and let this damn you,    And ditches grave you all!
Nay, in all confidence, hes not for Rhodes.
Intended or committed was this fault?    If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,    To win thy after-love I pardon thee.
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
My lord the king, the king!
Dost thou know her?
O princely Buckingham, Ill kiss thy hand    In sign of league and amity with thee.    Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!    Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,    Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate,    And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst,    But Kate,   the prettiest Kate in Christendom,    Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate    For dainties are all Kates   and therefore, Kate,    Take this of me, Kate of my consolation:    Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,    Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded    Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs    Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
Talk you of killing?
Let it be so.    Good night to every one.    [to BRABANTIO]     And, noble signior,    If virtue no delighted beauty lack,    Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
Be collected.No more amazement. Tell your piteous heartTheres no harm done.
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.
Men daily find it. Get thee away, and takeThy beagles with thee.
I have, Antiochus, and, with a soulEmbolden'd with the glory of her praise,Think death no hazard in this enterprise.
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughtsOn his behalf.
For him, I think not on him. For his thoughts,Would they were blanks, rather than filld with me.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse    Full of crusadoes.   And but my noble Moor    Is true of mind and made of no such baseness    As jealous creatures are, it were enough    To put him to ill thinking.
O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted. I will give out divers schedules of my beauty. It shall be inventoried, and every particle and utensil labeled to my will:   as, item, two lips indifferent red; item, two grey eyes, with lids to them; item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you sent hither to praise me?
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something. Make it a word and a blow.
Why, sir, he comes not.
I rather think    You have not sought her help,   of whose soft grace    For the like loss I have her sovereign aid,    And rest myself content.
'Slid, Ill after him again and beat him.
Madam?
Talk not, Signior Gremio. I say he shall go to prison.
See, your guests approach:Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,And let's be red with mirth.
Not yet, I thee beseech:    For ever will I walk upon my knees,    And never see day that the happy sees,    Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy,    By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.
Well, sir.
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?
Oh, but I fear. How lost you company?
[trying to give CALIBAN drink]     Come on your ways. Open your mouth. Here is that which will give language to you, cat. Open your mouth.   This will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and that soundly. You cannot tell whos your friend. Open your chaps again.
Never.
This is true that I say: an I had thee in place where,thou shouldst know it.
Belike you slew great number of his people?
Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind    I see thy glory like a shooting star    Fall to the base earth from the firmament.    Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,    Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest:    Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,    And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
Say there be;    Yet nature is made better by no mean    But nature makes that mean:   so, over that art    Which you say adds to nature, is an art    That nature makes.   You see, sweet maid, we marry    A gentler scion to the wildest stock,    And make conceive a bark of baser kind    By bud of nobler race:   this is an art    Which does mend nature, change it rather, but    The art itself is nature.
All our bills.
Think so, Iago?
How now, my metal of India?
I have: but what of him?
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence    Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers    Into your favor.    When remedies are past, the griefs are ended    By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.    To mourn a mischief that is past and gone    Is the next way to draw new mischief on.    What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,    Patience her injury a mock'ry makes.    The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief,    He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
Make haste. The hour of death is expiate.
If you refuse it, as in love and zeal    Loath to depose the child, your brothers son    As well we know your tenderness of heart    And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,    Which we have noted in you to your kindred    And equally indeed to all estates    Yet know whe'er you accept our suit or no,    Your brothers son shall never reign our king,    But we will plant some other in the throne,    To the disgrace and downfall of your house.    And in this resolution here we leave you.    Come, citizens. Zounds, Ill entreat no more.
Sir,    Having often of your open bounty tasted,    Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,    Whose thankless naturesO abhorred spirits!    Not all the whips of heaven are large enough:    What! to you,    Whose star-like nobleness gave life and influence    To their whole being! I am rapt and cannot cover    The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude    With any size of words.
Mistress Mary, if you prized my ladys favor at anything more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule.   She shall know of it, by this hand.
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,As my true service shall deserve your love.
E'en at hand, alighted by this. And therefore be not Cocks passion, silence! I hear my master.
At nine i' th' morning here well meet again.    Othello, leave some officer behind    And he shall our commission bring to you,    And such things else of quality and respect    As doth import you.
No way but gentleness, gently, gently. The fiend is rough and will not be roughly used.
Foul, wrinkled witch, what makst thou in my sight?
Have with you.
Hold thy peace, thou knave, knight? I shall be constrained in t to call thee knave, knight.
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Name him.
Good sir, be a man,    Think every bearded fellow thats but yoked    May draw with you.   Theres millions now alive    That nightly lie in those unproper beds    Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.    Oh, tis the spite of hell, the fiends arch-mock,    To lip a wanton in a secure couch,    And to suppose her chaste.   No, let me know,    And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
Heigh, my hearts! Cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! Yare! Yare!Take in the topsail. Tend to th' masters whistle. Blow, till thou burst thy wind, if room enough!
Oh, tis foul in her.
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart    Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels.    For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase,    Ill be a candle holder, and look on.    The game was neer so fair, and I am done.
O lady Fortune,Stand you auspicious!
My lord?
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.
We will descend and fold him in our arms.    Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,    So be thy fortune in this royal fight!    Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,    Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
I will not think but they ascend the sky,    And there awake Gods gentle-sleeping peace.     [aside to BUCKINGHAM]     O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!    Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,    His venom tooth will rankle to the death.    Have naught to do with him. Beware of him.    Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,    And all their ministers attend on him.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
Tell on thy mind; I say thy child shall live.
You have no cause.
Of this was Tamora delivered;    The issue of an irreligious Moor,    Chief architect and plotter of these woes:    The villain is alive in Titus' house,    And as he is, to witness this is true.    Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge    These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience,    Or more than any living man could bear.    Now you have heard the truth, what say you, Romans?    Have we done aught amiss,show us wherein,    And, from the place where you behold us now,    The poor remainder of Andronici    Will, hand in hand, all headlong cast us down.    And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,    And make a mutual closure of our house.    Speak, Romans, speak; and if you say we shall,    Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.
Dues! Whence are you?
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commandedNone should come at him.
Come, Ill go in with you.
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.
I never knew woman love man so.
Pink for flower.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.    This is a trick to put me from my suit.    Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst takeno money of me; but being enthralled as I am, itwill also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
Lets ha' t, good Grumio.
Whilst I remember    Her and her virtues, I cannot forget    My blemishes in them,   and so still think of    The wrong I did myself; which was so much,    That heirless it hath made my kingdom and    Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man    Bred his hopes out of.
Hortensio, hark.This gentleman is happily arrived,My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.    If that thy bent of love be honorable,    Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow    By one that Ill procure to come to thee    Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,    And all my fortunes at thy foot Ill lay    And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
Go thou, and fill another room in hell.
Highest queen of state,Great Juno, comes. I know her by her gait.
Sir, have pity,Ill be his surety.
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury.Wishing him my meat. Sure, he's a gallant gentleman.
Nay, I have offered all, I have no more,And she can have no more than all I have.  [To BAPTISTA]  If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
Is this wind westerly that blows?
Even he, my lord.
Dost thou forgetFrom what a torment I did free thee?
Ay, to eleven; and brought them down again. Butshall I search the market?
And you, sir.
And what's the third?
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.    Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!    Your love says, like an honest gentleman,    Where is your mother?
O momentary grace of mortal men,    Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!    Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks    Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,    Ready with every nod to tumble down    Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
Is this the Athenian minion, whom the worldVoiced so regardfully?
So two, together weeping, make one woe.    Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;    Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.    Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.
These were his very words.
I did impeticos thy gratillity, for Malvolios nose is no whipstock.   My lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.
I hope the king made peace with all of us;And the compact is firm and true in me.
She shall not.
It cannot be.
Better it were they all came by his father,    Or by the father there were none at all,    For emulation who shall now be nearest    Will touch us all too near if God prevent not.    O, full of danger is the duke of Gloucester,    And the queens sons and brothers haught and proud,    And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,    This sickly land might solace as before.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
More health and happiness betide my liegeThan can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!
Th exchange of thy loves faithful vow for mine.
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,    After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,    Are idly bent on him that enters next,    Thinking his prattle to be tedious;    Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes    Did scowl on gentle Richard;   no man cried 'God save him!'    No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:    But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:    Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,    His face still combating with tears and smiles,    The badges of his grief and patience,    That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd    The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted    And barbarism itself have pitied him.    But heaven hath a hand in these events,    To whose high will we bound our calm contents.    To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,    Whose state and honour I for aye allow.
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,Mistlike, infold me from the search of eyes.
Now, if you love me, stay.
Who? That Petruchio came?
Many do keep their chambers are not sick:    And, if it be so far beyond his health,    Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,    And make a clear way to the gods.
I do believe thee:    I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:    Be pilot to me and thy places shall    Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and    My people did expect my hence departure    Two days ago.   This jealousy    Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,    Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,    Must it be violent, and as he does conceive    He is dishonour'd by a man which ever    Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must    In that be made more bitter.   Fear o'ershades me:    Good expedition be my friend, and comfort    The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing    Of his ill-ta'en suspicion!   Come, Camillo;    I will respect thee as a father if    Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.
You say well.
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,    Her father and her country, and her friends,    To be called whore? Would it not make one weep?
As great to me as late. And, supportable    To make the dear loss,   have I means much weaker    Than you may call to comfort you, for I    Have lost my daughter.
If it prove    She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where    I lodge my wife;   I'll go in couples with her;    Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;    For every inch of woman in the world,    Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.
I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears for my labor.
What trumpet's that?
Might we but have that happiness, my lord, that youwould once use our hearts, whereby we might expresssome part of our zeals, we should think ourselvesfor ever perfect.
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes
Now, blessing on thee! rise; thou art my child.    Give me fresh garments. Mine own, Helicanus;    She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been,    By savage Cleon:   she shall tell thee all;    When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge    She is thy very princess. Who is this?
Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,That shakes not, though they blow perpetually.
He could never come better; he shall come in. Ilove a ballad but even too well, if it be dolefulmatter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thingindeed and sung lamentably.
'Twas Helicanus then.
O Valentine, this I endure for thee!
Have you that holy feeling in your souls    To counsel me to make my peace with God,    And art you yet to your own souls so blind    That thou will war with God by murd'ring me?    O sirs, consider: they that set you on    To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle    That so approve the Moor.   Oh, let the heavens    Give him defense against the elements,    For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
I will say of it,It tutors nature: artificial strifeLives in these touches, livelier than life.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
What's to be thought of him? does the rumour holdfor true, that he's so full of gold?
Now, whats the business?
Why, what art thou?
Saying, Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on your niece give me this prerogative of speech
Thou speak'st truth.    No more such wives; therefore, no wife:   one worse,    And better used, would make her sainted spirit    Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,    Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd,    And begin, 'Why to me?'
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieveAt knowing of thy choice.
I am for it, lieutenant, and Ill do you justice.
I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.
[to FERDINAND]    Look thou be true. Do not give dalliance    Too much the rein.   The strongest oaths are straw    To th' fire i' th' blood. Be more abstemious,    Or else, goodnight your vow.
But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would you could make it another.
He, for his fathers sake, so loves the prince That he will not be won to aught against him.
Look, who kneels here! Flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa;Thy burden at the sea, and call'd MarinaFor she was yielded there.
The which when any shall not gratify,    Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,    Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves,    The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils!    Till when,the which I hope shall ne'er be seen,    Your grace is welcome to our town and us.
There is, there is.
Why, how dost thou, man? What is the matter with thee?
Smilest thou? I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
[to CALIBAN]    Thou liest, most ignorant monster. I am incase to justle a constable. Why, thou deboshed fish, thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as I today?   Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?
I thought thou hadst been resolute.
Well-a-day that you were, sir.
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
Hope I may choose, sir.
Despised, distressèd, hated, martyred, killed!    Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now    To murder, murder our solemnity?    O child, O child! My soul, and not my child!    Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,    And with my child my joys are buried.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,But I will watch you from such watching now.
God ye good een, fair gentlewoman.
Fool, Ill requite it in the highest degree. I prithee,be gone.
Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.
Think you so, sir?
And still, as you are weary of this weight,Rest you, whiles I lament King Henrys corse.
No, coz, I rather weep.
I will be his conduct.
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
I cannot say 'tis pityShe lacks instructions, for she seems a mistressTo most that teach.
As rich shall Romeos by his ladys lie,Poor sacrifices of our enmity.
In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms,And every hour more competitorsFlock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence!
Mistress, how mean you that?
I am in this commanded to deliver    The noble duke of Clarence to your hands.    I will not reason what is meant hereby    Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.    There lies the duke asleep, and there the keys.     [He hands them the keys]     Ill to the king and signify to him    That thus I have resigned my charge to you.
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:    We have always truly served you, and beseech you    So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,    As recompense of our dear services    Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,    Which being so horrible, so bloody, must    Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.
Say that I slew them not.
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon    This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,    Both dame and servant;   welcomed all, served all;    Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,    At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle;    On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire    With labour and the thing she took to quench it,    She would to each one sip.   You are retired,    As if you were a feasted one and not    The hostess of the meeting:   pray you, bid    These unknown friends to's welcome; for it is    A way to make us better friends, more known.    Come, quench your blushes and present yourself    That which you are, mistress o' the feast:   come on,    And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,    As your good flock shall prosper.
Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent.   Or tobe turned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?
He is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on carpet consideration, but he is a devil in private brawl.   Souls and bodies hath he divorced three, and his incensement at this moment is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death and sepulchre.   Hob, nob, is his word. Give t or take t.
Ay me! Sad hours seem long.Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchants part,And venture madly on a desperate mart.
One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore,    Be sure of it.   Give me the ocular proof    Or by the worth of mine eternal soul    Thou hadst been better have been born a dog    Than answer my waked wrath!
I am content you shall entreat me stay,But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
Oh, the heavens!
The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.
Where?
Nor would I there reside,    To put my father in impatient thoughts    By being in his eye.   Most gracious Duke,    To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear    And let me find a charter in your voice,    T' assist my simpleness.
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,    And I will stand the hazard of the die.    I think there be six Richmonds in the field;    Five have I slain today instead of him.    A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
Ay, but why?
He came with flowers to strew his ladys grave,    And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.    Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,    And by and by my master drew on him,    And then I ran away to call the watch.
Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edwards hands.
Hist! Romeo, hist!Oh, for a falconers voice,    To lure this tassel-gentle back again!    Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,    Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,    And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,    With repetition of My Romeo!
Hold, Toby! On thy life I charge thee, hold!
No, he must not.
[aside]  This will I tell my lady straight. I would not be in some of your coats for two pence.
That is the cause we trouble you so early;'Tis not our husbandry.
Thou dost, and thinkst it much to tread the ooze    Of the salt deep,    To run upon the sharp wind of the north,    To do me business in the veins o' th' earth    When it is baked with frost.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
By Janus, I think no.
Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way!    They dance! they are mad women.    Like madness is the glory of this life.    As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.    We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves;    And spend our flatteries, to drink those men    Upon whose age we void it up again,    With poisonous spite and envy.    Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?    Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves    Of their friends' gift?    I should fear those that dance before me now    Would one day stamp upon me: 't has been done;    Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
You have said now.
We will, my noble lord.
Is t possible, my lord?
Ay, whats o'clock?
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, When men are unprepared and look not for it.
Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter, and thou artA villain.
My life upon her faith!Honest Iago,    My Desdemona must I leave to thee.    I prithee, let thy wife attend on her,    And bring them after in the best advantage.    Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour    Of love, of worldly matter and direction,    To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
'Farewell:'    And, for my heart disdained that my tongue    Should so profane the word,   that taught me craft    To counterfeit oppression of such grief    That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.    Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours    And added years to his short banishment,    He should have had a volume of farewells;    But since it would not, he had none of me.
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
[aside]  When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.
Ancient, conduct them. You best know the place.
No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.
Thou makest me merry. I am full of pleasure.    Let us be jocund.   Will you troll the catch    You taught me but whilere?
What says she to my valour?
What boots it thee to call thyself a sun?
You mock me, madam. This is not the wayTo win your daughter.
[aside]  As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.
Not yet.
Worthy Timon,
Look, who comes here: will you be chid?
Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus?
Didst thou not say he lied?
Either be patient and entreat me fair,Or with the clamorous report of warThus will I drown your exclamations.
Break up the seals and read.
What dost thou mean?
By a name    I know not how to tell thee who I am.    My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself    Because it is an enemy to thee.    Had I it written, I would tear the word.
We speak in vain.
I feel 't upon my bones.
To make an act of tragic violence.    Edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead.    Why grow the branches when the root is gone?    Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?    If you will live, lament. If die, be brief,    That our swift-wingèd souls may catch the kings,    Or, like obedient subjects, follow him    To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
Hath he said any thing?
Are you ready, sir?
What, of Venice?
Oh, thats an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,But I will have my lord and you againAs friendly as you were.
I go, my lord.
I hold it ever,    Virtue and cunning were endowments greater    Than nobleness and riches:   careless heirs    May the two latter darken and expend;    But immortality attends the former.    Making a man a god.   'Tis known, I ever    Have studied physic, through which secret art,    By turning o'er authorities, I have,    Together with my practise,   made familiar    To me and to my aid the blest infusions    That dwell in vegetives, in metals, stones;    And I can speak of the disturbances    That nature works, and of her cures;   which doth give me    A more content in course of true delight    Than to be thirsty after tottering honour,    Or tie my treasure up in silken bags,    To please the fool and death.
A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,    I had been still a happy king of men.    Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:    Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,    As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.    In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire    With good old folks and let them tell thee tales    Of woeful ages long ago betid;    And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,    Tell thou the lamentable tale of me    And send the hearers weeping to their beds  :  For why, the senseless brands will sympathize    The heavy accent of thy moving tongue    And in compassion weep the fire out;    And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,    For the deposing of a rightful king.
Why, this it is when men are ruled by women.    'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower.    My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, tis she    That tempers him to this extremity.    Was it not she and that good man of worship,    Anthony Woodeville, her brother there,    That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,    From whence this present day he is delivered?    We are not safe, Clarence. We are not safe.
This will I do, and soon return again.
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
A man whom both the waters and the wind,    In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball    For them to play upon, entreats you pity him:    He asks of you, that never used to beg.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,My father's dead.
An if I live until I be a man,Ill win our ancient right in France againOr die a soldier, as I lived a king.
Fetch drier logs.Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.
By Him that raised me to this careful height    From that contented hap which I enjoyed,    I never did incense his majesty    Against the duke of Clarence, but have been    An earnest advocate to plead for him.    My lord, you do me shameful injury    Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
Thanks, gentle Romans: may I govern so,    To heal Rome's harms, and wipe away her woe!    But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,    For nature puts me to a heavy task:    Stand all aloof:   but, uncle, draw you near,    To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk.    O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,
My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,As far as land will let me, by your side.
Marry, and it shall be done tomorrow morning if I live. My lady would not lose him for more than Ill say.
If you have any music that may not be heard, to t again. But, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.
O thou dull Moor! That handkerchief thou speakst of    I found by fortune and did give my husband.    For often, with a solemn earnestness    More than indeed belonged to such a trifle    He begged of me to steal it.
I'll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.
You gods, look down    And from your sacred vials pour your graces    Upon my daughter's head!   Tell me, mine own.    Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found    Thy father's court?   for thou shalt hear that I,    Knowing by Paulina that the oracle    Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved    Myself to see the issue.
Who was it?
Forgot you! No, sir. I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.
It cannot fail but by    The violation of my faith; and then    Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together    And mar the seeds within!   Lift up thy looks:    From my succession wipe me, father; I    Am heir to my affection.
We shall be short in our provision.Tis now near night.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Considers she my possessions?
Ant please your Honor, playersThat offer service to your Lordship.
Come, lets do so.For every minute is expectancyOf more arrivance.
Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,    Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave:    Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
She said so. I must needs report the truth.
For a worthy ladyAnd one whom much I honour.
Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
Why would she have me kill'd?    Now, as I can remember, by my troth,    I never did her hurt in all my life:    I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn    To any living creature: believe me, la,    I never kill'd a mouse, nor hurt a fly:    I trod upon a worm against my will,    But I wept for it.   How have I offended,    Wherein my death might yield her any profit,    Or my life imply her any danger?
Thou fond mad woman,    Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?    A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,    And interchangeably set down their hands,    To kill the king at Oxford.
My ladys a Cataian. We are politicians, Malvolios a Peg- a-Ramsey, and    (sings) Three merry men be we.    Am notI consanguineous? Am I not of her blood? Tillyvally! Lady!   (    sings) There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady!
To me he seems like diamond to glass.
[to MIRANDA]  The fringèd curtains of thine eye advanceAnd say what thou seest yond.
Ill warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.
If in her marriage my consent be missing,    I call the gods to witness,   I will choose    Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,    And dispossess her all.
Oh, thou art wise! 'Tis certain.
Why, how now, Stephano?
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be briska while, and the longer liver take all.
How long have you been of this profession?
I did say so.    Look, where he comes. Not poppy nor mandragora    Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,    Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep    Which thou owedst yesterday.
A segregation of the Turkish fleet.    For do but stand upon the foaming shore,    The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,    The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane,    Seems to cast water on the burning bear,    And quench the guards of th' ever-fixèd pole.    I never did like molestation view    On the enchafèd flood.
I was promised them against the feast; but they comenot too late now.
He, he, tis he.
This is desperate, sir.
Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you.    You drew your sword upon me without cause,    But I bespoke you fair and hurt you not.
He named Sebastian. I my brother know    Yet living in my glass.   Even such and so    In favor was my brother, and he went    Still in this fashion, color, ornament,    For him I imitate.   Oh, if it prove,    Tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love!
You may deny that you were not the meanOf my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.
She was false as water.
No, truly, sir. Not a penny.
I go, I go.
Report thy parentage.   I think thou said'st    Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury,    And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine,    If both were open'd.
(within) Bow-wow.
What thinkst thou then of Stanley? Will not he?
There was a man
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?
Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.
O, why should wrath be mute, and fury dumb?    I am no baby, I, that with base prayers    I should repent the evils I have done:    Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did    Would I perform, if I might have my will;    If one good deed in all my life I did,    I do repent it from my very soul.
To fight on Edwards party for the crown;    And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up.    I would to God my heart were flint, like Edwards,    Or Edwards soft and pitiful, like mine.    I am too childish-foolish for this world.
Was never widow had so dear a loss.
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.
Out of her favor, where I am in love.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.    Now will he sit under a medlar tree    And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit    As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.    O Romeo, that she were! Oh, that she were    An open arse, and thou a poperin pear.    Romeo, good night. Ill to my truckle bed.    This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.    Come, shall we go?
You're a dog.
An thou shouldst, thou 'ldst anger ladies.
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to    Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.    If therefore you dare trust my honesty,    That lies enclosed in this trunk which you    Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!    Your followers I will whisper to the business,    And will by twos and threes at several posterns    Clear them o' the city.   For myself, I'll put    My fortunes to your service, which are here    By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;    For, by the honour of my parents, I    Have utter'd truth:   which if you seek to prove,    I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer    Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon    His execution sworn.
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?In his tail.
Alice Madam, or Joan Madam?
I will, my lord.    Beseech you, first go with me to my house,    Where shall be shown you all was found with her;    How she came placed here in the temple;    No needful thing omitted.
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.Proud can I never be of what I hate,But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
Marry, will I, sir. And for that I promised you, Ill be as good as my word. He will bear you easily and reinswell.
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?    Have I been ever free, and must my house    Be my retentive enemy, my gaol?    The place which I have feasted, does it now,    Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?
Are they returned to the court?
About my stature; for at Pentecost,    When all our pageants of delight were play'd,    Our youth got me to play the woman's part,    And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown,    Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments,    As if the garment had been made for me:    Therefore I know she is about my height.    And at that time I made her weep agood,    For I did play a lamentable part:    Madam, 'twas Ariadne passioning    For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight;    Which I so lively acted with my tears    That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,    Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead    If I in thought felt not her very sorrow!
Let me go, sir, or Ill knock you o'er the mazzard.
It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
They that add, moreover, hes drunk nightly in your company.
At this same ancient feast of Capulets    Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves    With all the admired beauties of Verona.    Go thither, and with unattainted eye    Compare her face with some that I shall show,    And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
Veronas summer hath not such a flower.
One of the prettiest touches of all and that which    angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not    the fish,   was when, at the relation of the queen's    death, with the manner how she came to't bravely    confessed and lamented by the king,   how    attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one    sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,'    I would fain say, bleed tears,   for I am sure my    heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed    colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world    could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.
Why, then tis time to arm and give direction.     [his oration to his soldiers]     More than I have said, loving countrymen,    The leisure and enforcement of the time    Forbids to dwell upon.   Yet remember this:    God and our good cause fight upon our side.    The prayers of holy saints and wrongèd souls,    Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces.    Richard except, those whom we fight against    Had rather have us win than him they follow.    For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,    A bloody tyrant and a homicide;    One raised in blood, and one in blood established;    One that made means to come by what he hath,    And slaughtered those that were the means to help him;    A base foul stone, made precious by the foil    Of Englands chair, where he is falsely set;    One that hath ever been Gods enemy.    Then if you fight against Gods enemy,    God will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers.    If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,    You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain.    If you do fight against your countrys foes,    Your countrys fat shall pay your pains the hire.    If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,    Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors.    If you do free your children from the sword,    Your childrens children quits it in your age.    Then, in the name of God and all these rights,    Advance your standards. Draw your willing swords.    For me, the ransom of my bold attempt    Shall be this cold corpse on the earths cold face;    But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt    The least of you shall share his part thereof.    Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully;    God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!
You have little cause to say so.
'Tis a strange truth.
No, boy.
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.
A knave teach me my duty?Ill beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.
Rage must be withstood:Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?    What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?    In leads or oils?   what old or newer torture    Must I receive, whose every word deserves    To taste of thy most worst?   Thy tyranny    Together working with thy jealousies,    Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle    For girls of nine, O, think what they have done    And then run mad indeed, stark mad!   for all    Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.    That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing;    That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant    And damnable ingrateful:   nor was't much,    Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,    To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,    More monstrous standing by:   whereof I reckon    The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter    To be or none or little; though a devil    Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:    Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death    Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,    Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart    That could conceive a gross and foolish sire    Blemish'd his gracious dam:   this is not, no,    Laid to thy answer: but the last,O lords,    When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,    The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,    and vengeance for't    Not dropp'd down yet.
To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curseAbides in me. I say amen to her.
No, no, by Gods good grace, his son shall reign.
[To HORTENSIO as LITIO]    Well, go with me and be not so discomfited.    Proceed in practice with my younger daughter.    Shes apt to learn and thankful for good turns.    Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,    Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
O, he sends you for a picture.
No? Why? When he that is my husband now    Came to me, as I followed Henrys corse,    When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands    Which issued from my other angel husband    And that dear saint which then I weeping followed    O, when, I say, I looked on Richards face,    This was my wish: be thou, quoth I, accursed    For making me, so young, so old a widow;    And, when thou weddst, let sorrow haunt thy bed;    And be thy wife, if any be so mad,    More miserable by the life of thee    Than thou hast made me by my dear lords death.    Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,    Within so small a time my womans heart    Grossly grew captive to his honey words    And proved the subject of mine own souls curse,    Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest,    For never yet one hour in his bed    Did I enjoyed the golden dew of sleep,    But with his timorous dreams was still awaked.    Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,    And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle.    If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him    That is renowned for faith?   Be fickle, fortune,    For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,    But send him back.
Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay    In Brittany, received intelligence    That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,    That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,    His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,    Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,    Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,    All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne    With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,    Are making hither with all due expedience    And shortly mean to touch our northern shore:    Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay    The first departing of the king for Ireland.    If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,    Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,    Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,    Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt    And make high majesty look like itself,    Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;    But if you faint, as fearing to do so,    Stay and be secret, and myself will go.
That's true enough;Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
Pray you come in.I will bestow you where you shall have timeTo speak your bosom freely.
We still have known thee for a holy man. Wheres Romeos man? What can he say in this?
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
[Aside]  Must thou needs stand for a villain inthine own work? wilt thou whip thine own faults inother men? Do so, I have gold for thee.
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,    Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.    There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here    To make the blessèd period of this peace.
I gave him no order. I gave him the stuff.
I know him not, but I have heard of him:A merchant of incomparable wealth.
I would I could not think it: that thought isbounty's foe;Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
Did he write this?
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting. It is a most sharp sauce.
Yes, sir, I shall.
[Approaches the tomb]    Romeo!    Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains    The stony entrance of the sepulcher?    What mean these masterless and gory swords    To lie discolored by this place of peace?    [Looks inside the tomb]    Romeo! O, pale!Who else? What, Paris too?    And steeped in blood?Ah, what an unkind hour    Is guilty of this lamentable chance!    The lady stirs.
Adieu.
I am as mad as he, If sad and merry madness equal be.
Come on then. Down, and swear.
Fore heaven, an excellent song.
True, when avoided grace makes destiny. My babes were destined to a fairer deathIf grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.
Teach not thy lip such scorn, for it were made    For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.    If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,    Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword,    Which if thou please to hide in this true breast    And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,    I lay it naked to the deadly stroke    And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
For mine own part, no offence to the general nor any man of quality, I hope to be saved.
I say, by sorcery he got this isle.    From me he got it.   If thy greatness will    Revenge it on himfor I know thou darest,    But this thing dare not
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham!
What! lack I credit?
Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,And I would call it fair play.
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know    Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants.    Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,    And happily we might be interrupted.
By this good light, this is a very shallow monster. I afeard of him! A very weak monster. The man i' th' moon!A most poor credulous monster.   Well drawn, monster, in good sooth!
Pray God, he keep his oath!
This cannot be but a great courtier.
I warrant you, sir,The white cold virgin snow upon my heartAbates the ardor of my liver.
Here is his cave.    Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon!    Look out, and speak to friends:   the Athenians,    By two of their most reverend senate, greet thee:    Speak to them, noble Timon.
What, man, tis a night of revels! The gallants desire it.
Am I not wise?
What mean you by that saying?
O miserable lady! But, for me,    What case stand I in?   I must be the poisoner    Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't    Is the obedience to a master, one    Who in rebellion with himself will have    All that are his so too.   To do this deed,    Promotion follows.   If I could find example    Of thousands that had struck anointed kings    And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't;   but since    Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,    Let villany itself forswear't.   I must    Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain    To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!    Here comes Bohemia.
So much the more our carver's excellence;Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes herAs she lived now.
I should think so: he hath sent me an earnest    inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me    to put off;   but he hath conjured me beyond them, and    I must needs appear.
No.
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?And little Ned Plantagenet his son?
And yet but justice; for thoughThis king were great, his greatness was no guardTo bar heaven's shaft, but sin had his reward.
Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutios friend.His fault concludes but what the law should end,The life of Tybalt.
Mi perdonato,    gentle master mine.    I am in all affected as yourself,    Glad that you thus continue your resolve    To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.    Only, good master, while we do admire    This virtue and this moral discipline,    Lets be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray,    Or so devote to Aristotles checks    As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured.    Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,    And practice rhetoric in your common talk;    Music and poesy use to quicken you;    The mathematics and the metaphysics    Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.    No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en.    In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds.    Breathe Merriman, the poor cur is embossed,    And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach.    Sawst thou not, boy, how Silver made it good    At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault?    I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
Your lieutenant, if you list. Hes no standard.
I would exult, man. You know, he brought me out o' favor with my lady about a bear-baiting here.
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes, So was I bid report here to the stateBy Signior Angelo.
'Tis but so, I warrant.
What meanest thou by that, Malvolio?
O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!    How fine my master is!   I am afraid    He will chastise me.
Well aimed of such a young one.
We will go walk a little in the orchard, And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
So I do, madonna. But to read his right wits is to readthus.Therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.
I will return again into the house and desire some conduct of the lady.   I am no fighter.   I have heard of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others, to taste their valor. Belike this is a man of that quirk.
My liberty.
Your bedchamber.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,    Or I shall faint. A plague o both your houses!    They have made worms meat of me. I have it,    And soundly too. Your houses!
Rise up, good aunt.
Not I; 'twas Chiron and Demetrius:They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue;And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.
[to ANTONIO]  He will be talking.
A blank, my lord. She never told her love,    But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud,    Feed on her damask cheek.   She pined in thought,    And with a green and yellow melancholy    She sat like patience on a monument,    Smiling at grief.   Was not this love indeed?    We men may say more, swear more, but indeed    Our shows are more than will,   for still we prove    Much in our vows, but little in our love.
[as VINCENTIO]  Keep your hundred pounds to yourself. Heshall need none so long as I live.
How now, what news?
[reads]  The sleeves curiously cut.
The Emperor of Russia was my father:O that he were alive, and here beholdingHis daughter's trial! that he did but seeThe flatness of my misery, yet with eyesOf pity, not revenge!
Thaliard,    You are of our chamber, and our mind partakes    Her private actions to your secrecy;    And for your faithfulness we will advance you.    Thaliard, behold, here's poison, and here's gold;    We hate the prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him:    It fits thee not to ask the reason why,    Because we bid it. Say, is it done?
Too well what love women to men may owe.    In faith, they are as true of heart as we.    My father had a daughter loved a man    As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman,    I should your lordship.
Mark his condition and the event. Then tell meIf this might be a brother.
Down, strumpet!
Thats my good son. But where hast thou been, then?
Heres no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together!
Jove bless thee, master Parson.
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?I had rather be alone.
His discontents are unremoveablyCoupled to nature.
Woe, woe for England! Not a whit for me,    For I, too fond, might have prevented this.    Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm,    And I did scorn it and disdain to fly.    Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble,    And started when he looked upon the Tower,    As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse.    O, now I need the priest that spake to me!    I now repent I told the pursuivant,    As too triumphing, how mine enemies    Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,    And I myself secure in grace and favor.    O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse    Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head.
Thou art rash as fire,To say that she was false. Oh, she was heavenly true!
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where thouhast feigned him a worthy fellow.
By this hand, they are scoundrels and substractors thatsay so of him. Who are they?
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves,And let me be a slave t'achieve that maidWhose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Ah, aunt, you wept not for our fathers death.How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
And most chirurgeonly.
How! what does his cashiered worship mutter?
Name them, my lord, let's know them.
Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.
Think not on 't, sir.
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
So much?
What's that?
Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing solely singular.
How now, Lavinia! Marcus, what means this?    Some book there is that she desires to see.    Which is it, girl, of these? Open them, boy.    But thou art deeper read, and better skill'd    Come, and take choice of all my library,    And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens    Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed.    Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.
Receive the blood: and when that they are dead,    Let me go grind their bones to powder small    And with this hateful liquor temper it;    And in that paste let their vile heads be baked.    Come, come, be every one officious    To make this banquet;   which I wish may prove    More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.    So, now bring them in, for I'll play the cook,    And see them ready 'gainst their mother comes.
Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow,That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;    And spur thee on with full as many lies    As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear    From sun to sun:   there is my honour's pawn;    Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
Get you to your lord.    I cannot love him. Let him send no more    Unless perchance you come to me again    To tell me how he takes it.   Fare you well.    I thank you for your pains. Spend this for me.
That thou hast wrongèd in the time o'erpast;    For I myself have many tears to wash    Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee.    The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered,    Ungoverned youth, to wail it in their age;    The parents live whose children thou hast butchered,    Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.    Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast    Misused ere used, by times ill-used o'erpast.
[sings]    What is love? 'Tis not hereafter.    Present mirth hath present laughter.    Whats to come is still unsure.    In delay there lies no plenty.    Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty.    Youths a stuff will not endure.
Then be it so, and go we to determine    Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.    Madam, and you, my sister, will you go    To give your censures in this business?
Amen!
Ay, theres the villany.
I beseech your honour, one piece for me.
Away, Tybalt.
One, sir, that for his love dares yet do moreThan you have heard him brag to you he will.
Most noble lord,Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.
Once more, Cesario,    Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty.    Tell her my love, more noble than the world,    Prizes not quantity of dirty lands;    The parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her,    Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune;    But tis that miracle and queen of gems    That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
[Aside]  But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
Marvelous sweet music!
'Tis more than you deserve; But since you teach me how to flatter you,Imagine I have said farewell already.
So long could IStand by, a looker on.
Welcome, my lord what is the news?
They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,When I do see the very book indeedWhere all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me the glass, and therein will I read.    No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck    So many blows upon this face of mine,    And made no deeper wounds?   O flattering glass,    Like to my followers in prosperity,    Thou dost beguile me!   Was this face the face    That every day under his household roof    Did keep ten thousand men?   was this the face    That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?    Was this the face that faced so many follies,    And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?    A brittle glory shineth in this face:    As brittle as the glory is the face;
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
For love of her that's gone,Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.
For your broken shin.
A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart,For showing me again the eyes of man!
I swear to do this, though a present death    Had been more merciful.   Come on, poor babe:    Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens    To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say    Casting their savageness aside have done    Like offices of pity.   Sir, be prosperous    In more than this deed does require!   And blessing    Against this cruelty fight on thy side,    Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!
Well, give her that ring and therewithal    This letter. That's her chamber.   Tell my lady    I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.    Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,    Where thou shalt find me, sad and solitary.
I cannot tarry. I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit,and so may you, sir.   And so adieu, sir.   My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Lukes to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.
What art thou there? speak.
This cannot be,    By no assay of reason. 'Tis a pageant,    To keep us in false gaze.   When we consider    Th' importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,    And let ourselves again but understand    That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes    So may he with more facile question bear it,    For that it stands not in such warlike brace    But altogether lacks th' abilities    That Rhodes is dressed in.   If we make thought of this    We must not think the Turk is so unskillful    To leave that latest which concerns him first,    Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain    To wake and wage a danger profitless.
So stood the state when Henry the SixthWas crowned in Paris but at nine months old.
I know not, sir.
What, man, tis not so much, tis not so much.    Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,    Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,    Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.
The knave counterfeits well. A good knave.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.    But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter.    Now is the day we long have lookèd for.    I am your neighbor, and was suitor first.
If judgement lie in them, then so do we,Because we ever have been near the king.
You do mistake me, sir.
God grant him health. Did you confer with him?
It would become me    As well as it does you,   and I should do it    With much more ease, for my good will is to it    And yours it is against.
Not by his breath that is more miserable.    Thou art a slave, whom Fortune's tender arm    With favour never clasp'd; but bred a dog.    Hadst thou, like us from our first swath, proceeded    The sweet degrees that this brief world affords    To such as may the passive drugs of it    Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged thyself    In general riot; melted down thy youth    In different beds of lust;   and never learn'd    The icy precepts of respect, but follow'd    The sugar'd game before thee.   But myself,    Who had the world as my confectionary,    The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of men    At duty, more than I could frame employment,    That numberless upon me stuck as leaves    Do on the oak, hive with one winter's brush    Fell from their boughs and left me open, bare    For every storm that blows:   I, to bear this,    That never knew but better, is some burden:    Thy nature did commence in sufferance, time    Hath made thee hard in't. Why shouldst thou hate men?    They never flatter'd thee: what hast thou given?    If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,    Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff    To some she beggar and compounded thee    Poor rogue hereditary.   Hence, be gone!    If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,    Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.
Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!
If traffic do it, the gods do it.
My noble lord,
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
Here's mine.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.    Obey the bride, you that attend on her.    Go to the feast, revel and domineer,    Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,    Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves.    But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.    Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;    I will be master of what is mine own.    She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,    My household stuff, my field, my barn,    My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything.    And here she stands, touch her whoever dare.    Ill bring mine action on the proudest he    That stops my way in Padua.   Grumio,    Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves.    Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man.    Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate.    Ill buckler thee against a million.
Good fool, for my brothers death.
[to RICHARD]    Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow!    Think how thou stabbedst me in my prime of youth    At Tewkesbury. Despair therefore, and die!     [to RICHMOND]     Be cheerful, Richmond, for the wrongèd souls    Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf.    King Henrys issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
Pardon, master.I will be correspondent to commandAnd do my spiriting gently.
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!    I must be answer'd.   Dost thou hear, Camillo,    I conjure thee, by all the parts of man    Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least    Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare    What incidency thou dost guess of harm    Is creeping toward me;   how far off, how near;    Which way to be prevented, if to be;    If not, how best to bear it.
I am a poor fellow, sir.  [Aside]  I know ye well enough.
[calling offstage]  Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to countenance my mistress.
By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper, and light, and convey what I will set down to my lady.   It shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.
We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester    Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship,    And all the household servants fled with him    To Bolingbroke.
Near! why then, another time I'll hear thee:I prithee, let's be provided to show thementertainment.
You are a fool. Go to.
How now, Roderigo!
We can: my royal liege,He is not guilty of her coming hither.
Do not desire to see this letter.
Ha, come and bring away the nets!
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,    And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth:    A dearer merit, not so deep a maim    As to be cast forth in the common air,    Have I deserved at your highness' hands.    The language I have learn'd these forty years,    My native English, now I must forego:    And now my tongue's use is to me no more    Than an unstringed viol or a harp,    Or like a cunning instrument cased up,    Or, being open, put into his hands    That knows no touch to tune the harmony:    Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,    Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;    And dull unfeeling barren ignorance    Is made my gaoler to attend on me.    I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,    Too far in years to be a pupil now:    What is thy sentence then but speechless death,    Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
Doubt not that, if money and the season can yieldit.
I will help you to t. But tell me true, are you not mad indeed? Or do you but counterfeit?
And I can cut the mutton to t.
A sick man in sadness makes his will,A word ill urged to one that is so ill. In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
I am so far already in your gifts,
Brother, good day. What means this armèd guardThat waits upon your Grace?
I left no ring with her. What means this lady?    Fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her!    She made good view of me, indeed so much    That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue,    For she did speak in starts distractedly.    She loves me, sure! The cunning of her passion    Invites me in this churlish messenger.    None of my lords ring? Why, he sent her none.    I am the man.   If it be so, as tis,    Poor lady, she were better love a dream.    Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness,    Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.    How easy is it for the proper false    In womens waxen hearts to set their forms!    Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we,    For such as we are made of, such we be.    How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,    And I, poor monster, fond as much on him,    And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.    What will become of this? As I am man,    My state is desperate for my masters love.    As I am woman, now, alas the day,    What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!    O time, thou must untangle this, not I.    It is too hard a knot for me to untie!
Come, come, he must not.Mark our contract.
Ay, you are honest men.
Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.
I was adored once too.
How? Turn thy back and run?
Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,And awful rule, and right supremacy,And, to be short, what not thats sweet and happy?
He, woman. I say thy husbanddost understand the word?My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
Why, this is excellent.
With all my heart, gentlemen both; and how fare you?
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
Please you, my lord, that honourable    gentleman, Lord Lucullus, entreats your company    to-morrow to hunt with him,   and has sent your honour    two brace of greyhounds.
Ha!
And we mean well in going to this mask,But tis no wit to go.
That it would please you leave these sad designs    To him that hath more cause to be a mourner,    And presently repair to Crosby House,    Where, after I have solemnly interred    At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king    And wet his grave with my repentant tears,    I will with all expedient duty see you.    For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,    Grant me this boon.
Prithee, Kate, lets stand aside and see the end of this controversy.
Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude    The new-healed wound of malice should break out,    Which would be so much the more dangerous    By how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned.    Where every horse bears his commanding rein    And may direct his course as please himself,    As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,    In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
The what?
Go thou away:I'll follow instantly.
I speak not to thee.
All men but Proteus.
What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?
Sir Toby Belch! How now, Sir Toby Belch!
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,Whose duty is deceiveable and false.
First, sir, I pray,What is your title?
Look not pale, Bianca. Thy father will not frown.
My fathers death
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.You whoreson villain! Will you let it fall?  Strikes him
Ay, an it like your good worship.
The king hath on him such a countenance    As he had lost some province and a region    Loved as he loves himself:   even now I met him    With customary compliment;   when he,    Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling    A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and    So leaves me to consider what is breeding    That changeth thus his manners.
Who, Monsieur Veroles?
This was a goodly person,Till the disaster that, one mortal night,Drove him to this.
That, by killing of villains,    Thou wast born to conquer my country.    Put up thy gold: go on,here's gold,go on;    Be as a planetary plague, when Jove    Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison    In the sick air:   let not thy sword skip one:    Pity not honour'd age for his white beard;    He is an usurer: strike me the counterfeit matron;    It is her habit only that is honest,    Herself's a bawd:   let not the virgin's cheek    Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk-paps,    That through the window-bars bore at men's eyes,    Are not within the leaf of pity writ,    But set them down horrible traitors:   spare not the babe,    Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;    Think it a bastard, whom the oracle    Hath doubtfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,    And mince it sans remorse:     swear against objects;    Put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes;    Whose proof, nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,    Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,    Shall pierce a jot.   There's gold to pay soldiers:    Make large confusion; and, thy fury spent,    Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.
Marry, and did. But if you be remembered,    I did not bid you mar it to the time.    Go, hop me over every kennel home,    For you shall hop without my custom, sir.    Ill none of it. Hence, make your best of it.
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
I am very sorry that you are not well.
You sad Andronici, have done with woes:Give sentence on this execrable wretch,That hath been breeder of these dire events.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
[to RICHMOND]  Awake, and think our wrongs in Richards bosomWill conquer him! Awake, and win the day.
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself    To have a worthy feeding: but I have it    Upon his own report and I believe it;    He looks like sooth.   He says he loves my daughter:    I think so too; for never gazed the moon    Upon the water as he'll stand and read    As 'twere my daughter's eyes:   and, to be plain.    I think there is not half a kiss to choose    Who loves another best.
Patience, good sir.
Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Now, by Saint Paul, that news is bad indeed.    O, he hath kept an evil diet long,    And overmuch consumed his royal person.    'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.    Where is he, in his bed?
What, thou?
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong windwill blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.
[aside]   Wit, an t be thy will, put me into good fooling!   Those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft prove fools.   And I, that am sure I lack thee, may pass for a wise man. For what says Quinapalus?   Better awitty fool, than a foolish wit.
And now I remember, my lord, you gaveGood words the other day of a bay courserI rode on: it is yours, because you liked it.
Good heart, and i faith, I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
What is t oclock?
Too light for such a swain as you to catch,And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
O murd'rous slave! O villain!
Ill not meddle with it. It makes a man a coward: a mancannot steal but it accuseth him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his neighbors wife but it detects him.   'Tis a blushing, shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a mans bosom. It fills a man full of obstacles.   It made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance I found. It beggars any man that keeps it.   It is turned out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing, and every man that means to live well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.
Business, my lord! I think most understandBohemia stays here longer.
Your lordship speaks your pleasure.
Yet he would be king on t.
Dexterously, good madonna.
Claribel.
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,    A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave    Edward and York. Then haply she will weep.    Therefore present to heras sometime Margaret    Did to thy father, steeped in Rutlands blood    A handkerchief, which say to her did drain    The purple sap from her sweet brothers body,    And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.    If this inducement move her not to love,    Send her a letter of thy noble deeds;    Tell her thou madst away her uncle Clarence,    Her uncle Rivers, ay, and for her sake    Madst quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
Ha, ha, ha!
What!
I yield all this;But for some other reasons, my grave sir,Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaintMy father of this business.
Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent    When theirs are dry, for Romeos banishment.    Take up those cords.Poor ropes, you are beguiled,    Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.    He made you for a highway to my bed,    But I, a maid, die maiden-widowèd.    Come, cords.Come, Nurse. Ill to my wedding bed.    And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
He is not yet arrived. Nor know I aughtBut that hes well and will be shortly here.
Tut, I have work enough for you to do.Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine!
'Tis very good. I must be circumstanced.
Tell her the king, that may command, entreats
My gracious sovereign.
Of honorable reckoning are you both.    And pity tis you lived at odds so long.    But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
To cart her, rather. Shes too rough for me.There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
Good madam, hear me speak,    And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come    Taint the condition of this present hour,    Which I have wonderd at.   In hope it shall not,    Most freely I confess, myself and Toby    Set this device against Malvolio here,    Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts    We had conceived against him.   Maria writ    The letter at Sir Tobys great importance,    In recompense whereof he hath married her.    How with a sportful malice it was followed,    May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,    If that the injuries be justly weighed    That have on both sides passed.
Must I do so? and must I ravel out    My weaved-up folly?   Gentle Northumberland,    If thy offences were upon record,    Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop    To read a lecture of them?   If thou wouldst,    There shouldst thou find one heinous article,    Containing the deposing of a king    And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,    Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven:    Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,    Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,    Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands    Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates    Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,    And water cannot wash away your sin  .
Why, heres no crab, and therefore look not sour.
Miranda. O my father,I have broke your hest to say so!
Nay, Ill conjure too!    Romeo! Humours, madman, passion, lover!    Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh!    Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied.    Cry but Ay me! Pronounce but love and dove.    Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,    One nickname for her purblind son and heir,    Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so true    When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.    He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.    The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.    I conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes,    By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,    By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,    And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,    That in thy likeness thou appear to us.
[To CASSIO]  What are you here that cry so grievously?
You do yourselvesMuch wrong, you bate too much of your own merits:Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.
Will you sup there?
(  aside  ) What dish o' poison has she dressed him!
Well, you have made a simple choice. You know not how to choose a man. Romeo!   No, not he, though his face be better than any mans, yet his leg excels all mens, andfor a hand and a foot and a body, though they be not tobe talked on, yet they are past compare.   He is not the flower of courtesy, but, Ill warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at home?
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
Oh, he is even in my mistress case,    Just in her case. O woeful sympathy,    Piteous predicament!   Even so lies she,    Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.    Stand up, stand up. Stand, an you be a man.    For Juliets sake, for her sake, rise and stand.    Why should you fall into so deep an O?
You are a senator!
Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon    the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,    forty thousand fathom above water,   and sung this    ballad against the hard hearts of maids:   it was    thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold    fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that    loved her:   the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.
Madam, I am not well.
Stay, I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.
Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather, my mistress.
Ill news, by 'r Lady. Seldom comes the better. I fear, I fear, twill prove a giddy world.
Name it, fair cousin.
A thousand times the worse to want thy light.    Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,    But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to ina month.
Am I made?
Do we, my lord?
How! how!
But the rarity of it iswhich is indeed almost beyond credit
[From within]  Madam!
How!Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,I charged thee that she should not come about me:I knew she would.
O, let me speak!
[Aside]  How like a dream is this I see and hear!Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
Dispatch, I prithee.
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!
A plague upon this howling! They are louder than the weather or our office.
Whose death indeed's the strongest in our censure:    And knowing this kingdom is without a head,    Like goodly buildings left without a roof    Soon fall to ruin,   your noble self,    That best know how to rule and how to reign,    We thus submit unto,   our sovereign.
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if it touch not you it comes near nobody.
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,    What torch is yond that vainly lends his light    To grubs and eyeless skulls?   As I discern,    It burneth in the Capels monument.
I know thee well. How dost thou, my good fellow?
I do believe itAgainst an oracle.
Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
[aside]  Pray God defend me! A little thing would make me tell them how much I lack of a man.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
[sings]      No more dams Ill make for fish,    Nor fetch in firing    At requiring,    Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish.    'Ban, 'Ban, Ca-Caliban    Has a new master. Get a new man.    Freedom, high-day! High-day, freedom! Freedom, high-day, freedom!
'Tis far off,    And rather like a dream than an assurance    That my remembrance warrants.   Had I not    Four or five women once that tended me?
Dost thou mock me?
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the kings fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
Heres goodly gear.
Hail, madam, and my queen!
It shall not die.
Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am shent forspeaking to you.
Sir, I bade them take away you.
[as LUCENTIO]  But say, what to thine old news?
Who does beguile you? Who does do you wrong?
Men judge by the complexion of the sky    The state and inclination of the day:    So may you by my dull and heavy eye,    My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.    I play the torturer, by small and small    To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:    Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke,    And all your northern castles yielded up,    And all your southern gentlemen in arms    Upon his party.
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
Thou hast said enough.    Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth    Of that sweet way I was in to despair!    What say you now? what comfort have we now?    By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly    That bids me be of comfort any more.    Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away;    A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.    That power I have, discharge; and let them go    To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,    For I have none:   let no man speak again    To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
An you re us and fa us, you note us.
Hag-seed, hence!    Fetch us in fuel. And be quick, thou 'rt best,    To answer other business. Shrugst thou, malice?    If thou neglectst or dost unwillingly    What I command, Ill rack thee with old cramps,    Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar    That beasts shall tremble at thy din.
We were never so much out of creatures.   We have but    poor three, and they can do no more than they can    do;   and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.
It likes me well.   Cambio, hie you home,    And bid Bianca make her ready straight.    And, if you will, tell what hath happenèd:    Lucentios father is arrived in Padua,    And how shes like to be Lucentios wife.
Ay, if your selfs remembrance wrong yourself.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,    Though, I confess, much like the character.    But out of question, tis Marias hand.    And now I do bethink me, it was she    First told me thou wast mad, then camest in smiling,    And in such forms which here were presupposed    Upon thee in the letter.   Prithee, be content.    This practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee;    But when we know the grounds and authors of it,    Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge    Of thine own cause.
And whats he then that says I play the villain?    When this advice is free I give and honest,    Probal to thinking and indeed the course    To win the Moor again?   For tis most easy    Th' inclining Desdemona to subdue    In any honest suit. Shes framed as fruitful    As the free elements.   And then for her    To win the Moor, were to renounce his baptism,    All seals and symbols of redeemèd sin,    His soul is so enfettered to her love,    That she may make, unmake, do what she list,    Even as her appetite shall play the god    With his weak function. How am I then a villain    To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,    Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!    When devils will the blackest sins put on    They do suggest at first with heavenly shows    As I do now.   For whiles this honest fool    Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune    And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,    Ill pour this pestilence into his ear:    That she repeals him for her bodys lust.    And by how much she strives to do him good    She shall undo her credit with the Moor.    So will I turn her virtue into pitch    And out of her own goodness make the net    That shall enmesh them all.
We are near Tarsus.
Where is kind Hastings?
Camillo has betray'd me;Whose honour and whose honesty till nowEndured all weathers.
Would they else be content to die?
So indeed I did.
I dare not know, my lord.
No, my dearest love,I would not for the world.
Thou art a grave and noble counsellor,    Most wise in general:   tell me, if thou canst,    What this maid is, or what is like to be,    That thus hath made me weep?
All that is spoke is marred.
Farewell, my lord: securely I espyVirtue with valour couched in thine eye.Order the trial, marshal, and begin.
A man, as you are.
Upon the stroke of ten.
Besides, our nearness to the king in loveIs near the hate of those love not the king.
Here comes the Duke of York.
I would thou hadst my bones and I thy news.Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good Nurse, speak.
Hear me a word,For I shall never speak to thee again.
Gremio, tis now no time to vent our love.    Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,    Ill tell you news indifferent good for either.    [presenting  PETRUCHIO  ]    Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,    Upon agreement from us to his liking,    Will undertake to woo curst Katherine,    Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
Here.
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;    Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,    Grows strong and great in substance and in power.
Why, stay and hear me speak.
My lord, whoever journeys to the prince,    For Gods sake let not us two at home.    For by the way Ill sort occasion,    As index to the story we late talked of,    To part the queens proud kindred from the prince.
[To ANTONIO]  When came he to this town?
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Who have we here?  [Seeing AUTOLYCUS]  We'll make an instrument of this, omitNothing may give us aid.
No, I'll not rearAnother's issue.
No, I pray you;I'll not bereave you of your servant.
It shall be possible. Swear by this swordThou wilt perform my bidding.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
Will you come to bed, my lord?
Good counsel, marry. Learn it, learn it, marquess.
Very like. One of themIs a plain fish, and no doubt marketable.
You are too senseless obstinate, my lord,    Too ceremonious and traditional.    Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,    You break not sanctuary in seizing him.    The benefit thereof is always granted    To those whose dealings have deserved the place    And those who have the wit to claim the place.    This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it    And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.    Then taking him from thence that is not there,    You break no privilege nor charter there.    Oft have I heard of sanctuary men,    But sanctuary children, ne'er till now.
How can that be?
Long live Gonzalo!
Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me!
I have.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word,As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.Have at thee, coward!
O heavens, can you hear a good man groan,    And not relent, or not compassion him?    Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy,    That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart    Than foemen's marks upon his batter'd shield;    But yet so just that he will not revenge.    Revenge, ye heavens, for old Andronicus!
This is the matter.Nurse, give leave awhile,    We must talk in secret.   Nurse, come back again.    I have remembered me. Thous hear our counsel.    Thou knowst my daughters of a pretty age.
(  aside  ) Her Cs, her Us and her Ts. Why that?
Lo, where he comes!
What says she to my face?
Oh, she knew well    Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.    But come, young waverer, come, go with me,    In one respect Ill thy assistant be,    For this alliance may so happy prove    To turn your households rancor to pure love.
Thats a certain text.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Do, do. We steal by line and level, an t like your grace.
Art not a poet?
I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.
Should you do so, my lord,    My speech should fall into such vile success    Which my thoughts aimed not at.   Cassios my worthy friend    My lord, I see youre moved.
And this.
Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought with the men, I will be civil with the maids. I will cut off their heads.
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
These are my ministers, and come with me.
Yet ask.
Cassio did top her, ask thy husband else.    Oh, I were damned beneath all depth in hell,    But that I did proceed upon just grounds    To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
Ay, of my pigeons, sir; nothing else.
Come, swear it, damn thyself.    Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves    Should fear to seize thee.   Therefore be double damned,    Swear thou art honest!
A joint stool.
Fool, I say!
Ay,    If money were as certain as your waiting,    'Twere sure enough.    Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills,    When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?    Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts    And take down the interest into their    gluttonous maws.    You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up;    Let me pass quietly:    Believe 't, my lord and I have made an end;    I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
Widow! A pox o' that! How came that widow in? Widow Dido!
Calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet gown, having come from a daybed, where I have left Olivia sleeping
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.
Why then, he is alive.
Your wife, my lord. Your true and loyal wife.
My lord.
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!    Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again;    Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,    But makes one pardon strong.
Why, so, brave lords! when we join in league,    I am a lamb: but if you brave the Moor,    The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,    The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.    But say, again; how many saw the child?
My Lord
That time serves still.
It is in mine authority to commandThe keys of all the posterns: please your highnessTo take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.
That's the least fear; for, by the semblanceOf their white flags display'd, they bring us peace,And come to us as favourers, not as foes.
[as LUCENTIO]  Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free For me as for you?
And what of him?
Let me be taen. Let me be put to death.    I am content, so thou wilt have it so.    Ill say yon grey is not the mornings eye.    Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthias brow.    Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat    The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.    I have more care to stay than will to go.    Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.    How is t, my soul? Lets talk. It is not day.
I'll draw the curtain:My lord's almost so far transported thatHe'll think anon it lives.
Nay, but hear me.
All leave us else; but let your cares o'erlookWhat shipping and what lading's in our haven,And then return to us.  [Exeunt Lords]  Helicanus, thouHast moved us: what seest thou in our looks?
If I did think, sir, I were well awake,    Id strive to tell you.   We were dead of sleep    Andhow, we know notall clapped under hatches,    Where but even now with strange and several noises    Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,    And more diversity of sounds, all horrible,    We were awaked, straightway at liberty,    Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld    Our royal, good, and gallant ship,   our Master    Capering to eye her. On a trice, so please you,    Even in a dream were we divided from them    And were brought moping hither.
Whats the matter, think you?
[aside]  Fair encounterOf two most rare affections! Heavens rain graceOn that which breeds between 'em!
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest    thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?    hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?    receives not thy nose court-odor from me?   reflect I    not on thy baseness court-contempt?   Thinkest thou,    for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy    business, I am therefore no courtier?   I am courtier    cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck    back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to    open thy affair.
No more of drowning, do you hear?
Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.
I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs;I have drawn her picture with my voice.
'Faith, they listened to me as they would have    hearkened to their father's testament.   There was a    Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he went to bed to    her very description.
If thou more murmurst, I will rend an oak    And peg thee in his knotty entrails   till    Thou hast howled away twelve winters.
Carthage?
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,    My women may be with me; for you see    My plight requires it.   Do not weep, good fools;    There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress    Has deserved prison, then abound in tears    As I come out: this action I now go on    Is for my better grace.   Adieu, my lord:    I never wish'd to see you sorry; now    I trust I shall.   My women, come; you have leave.
If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Do so, my friends. See them well entertain'd.
Pitchers have ears.
My lord, for aught I know.
Out!A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:A most intelligencing bawd!
And stay, good Nurse. Behind the abbey wall    Within this hour my man shall be with thee    And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,    Which to the high top-gallant of my joy    Must be my convoy in the secret night.    Farewell. Be trusty, and Ill quit thy pains.    Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find theinclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
[standing]  Amen.  [aside]  And make me die a good old man! That is the butt end of a mothers blessing;I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.
See, brother, see; note how she quotes the leaves.
Ay, Apemantus.
How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?
O, ay, Curtis, ay, and therefore fire, fire. Cast on nowater.
Iago? Oh, I am spoiled, undone by villains!Give me some help.
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,    Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts    How I might stop this tempest ere it came;    And finding little comfort to relieve them,    I thought it princely charity to grieve them.
The princes both make high account of you  [aside]  For they account his head upon the Bridge.
With all my heartI pardon him.
Such a house broke!    So noble a master fall'n! All gone!   and not    One friend to take his fortune by the arm,    And go along with him!
That if one break, the other will hold.   Or, if both break, your gaskins fall.
She is alive; behold,    Her eyelids, cases to those heavenly jewels    Which Pericles hath lost,    Begin to part their fringes of bright gold;    The diamonds of a most praised water    Do appear, to make the world twice rich.   Live,    And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,    Rare as you seem to be.
So may you lose your arms.If you strike me, you are no gentleman;And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
[Aside]   This is that banished haughty Montague,    That murdered my loves cousin, with which grief,    It is supposed the fair creature died.    And here is come to do some villainous shame    To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.    [To ROMEO]   Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!    Can vengeance be pursued further than death?    Condemnèd villain, I do apprehend thee.    Obey and go with me, for thou must die.
Foul devil, for Gods sake, hence, and trouble us not,    For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,    Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.    If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,    Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
I do follow here in the chase not like a hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is almostspent, I have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled, and I think the issue will be I shall have so much experience for my pains.   And so, with no money at all and a little more wit, return again to Venice.
How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?    Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts;    For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.    And cannot say, you dare not.   Good Camillo,    Your changed complexions are to me a mirror    Which shows me mine changed too;   for I must be    A party in this alteration, finding    Myself thus alter'd with 't.
Whence came you, sir?
Sweet love, I see, changing his property,    Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:    Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made    With heads, and not with hands;   those whom you curse    Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound    And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,    But none returns   . For us to levy power    Proportionable to the enemy    Is all unpossible.
Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius,And will revolt from me to succor him.
Whose womb unmeasurable, and infinite breast,    Teems, and feeds all;   whose self-same mettle,    Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puff'd,    Engenders the black toad and adder blue,    The gilded newt and eyeless venom'd worm,    With all the abhorred births below crisp heaven    Whereon Hyperion's quickening fire doth shine;    Yield him, who all thy human sons doth hate,    From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!    Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb,    Let it no more bring out ingrateful man!    Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears;    Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face    Hath to the marbled mansion all above    Never presented!   O, a root,dear thanks!    Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas;    Whereof ungrateful man, with liquorish draughts    And morsels unctuous, greases his pure mind,    That from it all consideration slips!
How now? Who has put in?
What, canst not rule her?
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!Thou talkst of nothing.
[to RICHARD]    When I was mortal, my anointed body    By thee was punchèd full of deadly holes.    Think on the Tower and me. Despair, and die!    Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die.     [to RICHMOND]     Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror.    Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king,    Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish.
I am more serious than my custom.   You    Must be so too if heed me, which to do    Trebles thee o'er.
A gentleman of Tyre; my name, Pericles;    My education been in arts and arms;    Who, looking for adventures in the world,    Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men,    And after shipwreck driven upon this shore.
Follow, I pray you.
No, not tonight.
I confess the cape.
I will, my lord, with all convenient haste.
Madam, I am here. What is your will?
Why then, resolve me whether you will or no.
Your lordship ever binds him.
Ill make the motion. Stand here, make a good show on t.    This shall end without the perdition of souls.   [aside]   Marry,    Ill ride your horse as well as I ride you.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
Iago is most honest.    Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest    Let me have speech with you.    Come, my dear love,    The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue:    That profits yet to come tween me and you.    Good night.
Old lord, I cannot blame thee,    Who am myself attached with weariness    To th' dulling of my spirits. Sit down and rest.    Even here I will put off my hope and keep it    No longer for my flatterer.   He is drowned    Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks    Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.
See for the news.
You holy clergymen, is there no plotTo rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
Lend thine ear.
You scorn: believe me, 'twere best I did give o'er.
I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
She is,When once she is my wife.
That I am pretty.
But thou must needs be sure My spirits and my place have in their powerTo make this bitter to thee.
I love thee better now than e'er I did.
Oh, falsely, falsely murdered!
Tedious it were to tell and harsh to hear.  Sufficeth I am come to keep my word, Though in some part enforcèd to digress,Which, at more leisure, I will so excuseAs you shall well be satisfied withal.But where is Kate? I stay too long from her.The morning wears. 'Tis time we were at church.
You are deceived. Your brother Gloucester hates you.
The devil speaks in him.
If without peril it be possible, Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him,And give him from me this most needful note.
Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.This is not Romeo. Hes some other where.
That quaffing and drinking will undo you:   I heard my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.
[to YORK]  Come, come, my boy. We will to sanctuary.Madam, farewell.
[Within]  My liege, beware; look to thyself;Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;Have you a father?
Faith, none but Humfrey Hower, that called your Grace    To breakfast once, forth of my company.    If I be so disgracious in your eye,    Let me march on and not offend you, madam.    Strike up the drum.
Where I have learned me to repent the sin    Of disobedient opposition    To you and your behests,   and am enjoined    By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here    To beg your pardon.   [Falls to her knees]    Pardon, I beseech you!    Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Why, I'll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, andour king the good Simonides.
She gives it out that you shall marry her.Do you intend it?
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,And yet I would it were to give again.
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.    They do abuse the king that flatter him:    For flattery is the bellows blows up sin;    The thing which is flatter'd, but a spark,    To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing;    Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,    Fits kings, as they are men, for they may err.    When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace,    He flatters you, makes war upon your life.    Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please;    I cannot be much lower than my knees.
Ah, madam, 'tis too true:   and that is worse,    The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,    The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,    With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
Good faith, a little one, not past a pint, As I am a soldier.
Marry, I fare well,For here is cheer enough. Where is my wife?
With an eye of green in t.
Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!Choler does kill me that thou art alive;I swound to see thee.
And to sink in it, should you burthen loveToo great oppression for a tender thing.
I would there were no age between sixteen and    three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the    rest; for there is nothing in the between but    getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,    stealing, fighting   Hark you now! Would any but    these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty    hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my    best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find    than the master:   if any where I have them, 'tis by    the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy    will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very    pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder?   A    pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:    though I am not bookish, yet I can read    waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape.   This has been    some stair-work, some trunk-work, some    behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this    than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for    pity:   yet I'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed    but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!
Why, when, I say?Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry. Off with my boots, you rogues! You villains, when?
Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?
What must be shall be.
Should a villain say so,The most replenish'd villain in the world,He were as much more villain: you, my lord,Do but mistake.
Villainy, villainy, villainy!    I think upon t, I think I smell t, Oh, villainy!    I thought so then, Ill kill myself for grief.    Oh, villainy, villainy!
G   ive me no help in lamentation.    I am not barren to bring forth complaints.    All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,    That I, being governed by the watery moon,    May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world.    Ah, for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!
Confine? Ill confine myself no finer than I am.   These clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too.   An they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
I shall report,For most it caught me, the celestial habits,Methinks I so should term them, and the reverenceOf the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!How ceremonious, solemn and unearthlyIt was i' the offering!
Good night, good night. Heaven me such uses send,Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!
It is in vain that you would speak with Timon;    For he is set so only to himself    That nothing but himself which looks like man    Is friendly with him.
I pray the gods she may, with all my heart!
But Ill be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.Marry, go before to field, hell be your follower.Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Let it go naked, men may see't the better:You that are honest, by being what you are,Make them best seen and known.
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours.    He should, for that, commit your godfathers.    O, belike his majesty hath some intent    That you shall be new christened in the Tower.    But whats the matter, Clarence? May I know?
Her father loved me, oft invited me,    Still questioned me the story of my life    From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,    That I have passed.    I ran it through, even from my boyish days,    To th' very moment that he bade me tell it,    Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances,    Of moving accidents by flood and field,    Of hair-breadth scapes i' th' imminent deadly breach,    Of being taken by the insolent foe    And sold to slavery,   of my redemption thence    And portance in my travelers history.    Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,    Rough quarries, rocks, hills whose heads touch heaven    It was my hint to speaksuch was my process    And of the Cannibals that each others eat,    The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads    Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to hear    Would Desdemona seriously incline.    But still the house affairs would draw her hence,    Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,    Shed come again, and with a greedy ear    Devour up my discourse,   which I, observing,    Took once a pliant hour and found good means    To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart    That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,    Whereof by parcels she had something heard    But not intentively. I did consent,    And often did beguile her of her tears    When I did speak of some distressful stroke    That my youth suffered.   My story being done    She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.    She swore, in faith, twas strange, twas passing strange,    'Twas pitiful, twas wondrous pitiful.    She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished    That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked me    And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,    I should but teach him how to tell my story    And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake.    She loved me for the dangers I had passed,    And I loved her that she did pity them.    This only is the witchcraft I have used.    Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.
He's irremoveable,    Resolved for flight.   Now were I happy, if    His going I could frame to serve my turn,    Save him from danger, do him love and honour,    Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia    And that unhappy king, my master, whom    I so much thirst to see.
[giving the letter to FABIAN]  Read it you, sirrah.
Still live they, and forever let them last.
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.    Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man.    Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.    Let them affright thee.   I beseech thee, youth,    Put not another sin upon my head    By urging me to fury. O, be gone!    By heaven, I love thee better than myself,    For I come hither armed against myself.    Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say    A madmans mercy bid thee run away.
O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies!    Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!    Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man.    What think you: if he were conveyed to bed,    Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,    A most delicious banquet by his bed,    And brave attendants near him when he wakes,    Would not the beggar then forget himself?
Freely, good father.
Now, by my troth, if I had been remembered,I could have given my uncles grace a flout To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.
Right.
Are these thy ministers? what are they call'd?
'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white    Natures own sweet and cunning hand laid on.    Lady, you are the cruelst she alive    If you will lead these graces to the grave    And leave the world no copy.
Then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends.
A challenge, on my life.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness.
Pray, draw near.
Our horses!
Mistress, we have.
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.
And I mine.
[giving him money]  I understand you, sir. 'Tis well begged.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will takethe wall of any man or maid of Montagues.
O Dionyza, such a piece of slaughterThe sun and moon ne'er look'd upon!
Yet
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,    And be it moon, or sun, or what you please.    An if you please to call it a rush candle,    Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee,    Attend our weightier judgment.   And, not to swell    our spirit,    He shall be executed presently.
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view    He may surrender;   so we shall proceed    Without suspicion.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.
Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,    Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,    Kill what I love?   A savage jealousy    That sometimes savors nobly.   But hear me this:    Since you to nonregardance cast my faith,    And that I partly know the instrument    That screws me from my true place in your favor,    Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still.    But this your minion, whom I know you love,    And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,    Him will I tear out of that cruel eye    Where he sits crowned in his masters spite.    [To VIOLA]   Come, boy, with me. My thoughts are ripe inmischief:    Ill sacrifice the lamb that I do love    To spite a ravens heart within a dove.
Scorning advice, read the conclusion then:    Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed,    As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed.
When every grief is entertained thats offered,Comes to th' entertainer
If youll sit down,Ill bear your logs the while. Pray, give me that.Ill carry it to the pile.
I will embrace    Your offer.   Come, dearest madam.   O, no tears,    Lychorida, no tears:    Look to your little mistress, on whose grace    You may depend hereafter.   Come, my lord.
Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast notthere for the goose.
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred wordsOf that tongues uttering, yet I know the sound. Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Didst note it?
Why should calamity be full of words?
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand andwalk: I will even take my leave of you, and pacesoftly towards my kinsman's.
Prosper you, sweet sir!  [Exit Clown]  Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if Imake not this cheat bring out another and theshearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my nameput in the book of virtue!  [Sings]  Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,And merrily hent the stile-a:A merry heart goes all the day,Your sad tires in a mile-a.
Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.
Oh! Oh! Oh!
I do remember me, Henry the Sixth    Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,    When Richmond was a little peevish boy.    A king, perhaps
Is t possible?
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,So stumblest on my counsel?
I have too few to take my leave of you,    When the tongue's office should be prodigal    To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
Alas now, pray you,    Work not so hard. I would the lightning had    Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile!    Pray, set it down and rest you.   When this burns,    'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father    Is hard at study. Pray now, rest yourself.    Hes safe for these three hours.
Dear lad, believe it.    For they shall yet belie thy happy years    That say thou art a man.   Dianas lip    Is not more smooth and rubious. Thy small pipe    Is as the maidens organ, shrill and sound,    And all is semblative a womans part.    I know thy constellation is right apt    For this affair.   [To CURIO and attendants]    Some four or five attend him.    All, if you will, for I myself am best    When least in company.   [To VIOLA]   Prosper well in this,    And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,    To call his fortunes thine.
Thats not so good now.
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then    'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a    wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters    and a dram dead;   then recovered again with    aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as    he is, and in the hottest day prognostication    proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the    sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he    is to behold him with flies blown to death.   But what    talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries    are to be smiled at, their offences being so    capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain    men, what you have to the king:   being something    gently considered, I'll bring you where he is    aboard, tender your persons to his presence,    whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man    besides the king to effect your suits, here is man    shall do it.
Where is that ring, boy?
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash    To be a party in this injury.    Patience awhile, good Cassio.   Come, come,    Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?    Alas, my friend and my dear countryman    Roderigo! Noyes, sure! Yes, tis Roderigo.
Wilt come? Ill follow, Stephano.
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,And, with them, Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
But it becomes me well enough, does t not?
Alas, sir!
This closing with him fits his lunacy    Whate'er I forge to feed his brain-sick fits,    Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,    For now he firmly takes me for Revenge;    And, being credulous in this mad thought,    I'll make him send for Lucius his son;    And, whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,    I'll find some cunning practise out of hand,    To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,    Or, at the least, make them his enemies.    See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.
Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not    wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not    being a tall fellow, trust me not.   Hark! the kings    and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the    queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy    good masters.
How!
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.    Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought    For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,    Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross    Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens:    And toil'd with works of war, retired himself    To Italy; and there at Venice gave    His body to that pleasant country's earth,    And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,    Under whose colours he had fought so long.
Nay, stare not, masters, it is true, indeed.
Is t so, indeed.
But crave! Then I'll turn craver too, and so Ishall 'scape whipping.
Fie, fie upon her! she's able to freeze the god    Priapus, and undo a whole generation.   We must    either get her ravished, or be rid of her.   When she    should do for clients her fitment, and do me the    kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks,    her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her    knees;     that she would make a puritan of the devil,    if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
O, my poor brother! And so perchance may he be.
Come, come, I know 'tis good for you.Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least:Remember what I have said.
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wildfowl?
How poor are they that have not patience!    What wound did ever heal but by degrees?    Thou knowst we work by wit and not by witchcraft,    And wit depends on dilatory time.    Doest not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee.    And thou, by that small hurt, hath cashiered Cassio.    Though other things grow fair against the sun,    Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.    Content thyself awhile. In troth, tis morning.    Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.    Retire thee, go where thou art billeted.    Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter.    Nay, get thee gone.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see.She has deceived her father, and may thee.
[aside]  How now, Roderigo?I pray you, after the lieutenant, go!
Why to give over, I pray you? is it a shame to getwhen we are old?
A hundred then.
Yet I beseech you,    If you think fit, or that it may be done,    Give me advantage of some brief discourse    With Desdemona alone.
Where's Bohemia? speak.
(  aside  ) Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
Faith, as cold as can be.
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!
Admirable: how this grace    Speaks his own standing!   what a mental power    This eye shoots forth! how big imagination    Moves in this lip! to the dumbness of the gesture    One might interpret.
Then let us both be sudden.
If nothing lets to make us happy both    But this my masculine usurped attire,    Do not embrace me till each circumstance    Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump    That I am Viola.   Which to confirm,    Ill bring you to a captain in this town,    Where lie my maiden weeds, by whose gentle help    I was preserved to serve this noble count.    All the occurrence of my fortune since    Hath been between this lady and this lord.
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
Of that theres none, or little.
Sir Toby, I must be round with you.   My lady bade me tell you, that, though she harbors you as her kinsman, shes nothing allied to your disorders.   If you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you are welcometo the house. If not, an it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.
There, Hastings, I will never more rememberOur former hatred, so thrive I and mine.
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind    To help him to his grave immediately!    The lining of his coffers shall make coats    To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.    Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him:    Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!
Ay.
You speak too bitterly.
Know, my loving lord,The marquess Dorset, as I hear, is fled To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.
Good night.Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Would thou wouldst burst!
Why, what is Tybalt?
Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my lady.Make your excuse wisely, you were best.
Ay, with a heart as willingAs bondage e'er of freedom. Heres my hand.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence cell,And gave him what becomèd love I might, Not stepping oer the bounds of modesty.
Make haste, make haste, sirrah.
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
What black magician conjures up this fiend To stop devoted charitable deeds?
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.    Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,    And turn again.   And she can weep, sir, weep.    And shes obedient, as you say, obedient,    Very obedient.    (To DESDEMONA)    Proceed you in your tears.     (To LODOVICO)    Concerning this, sir    (To DESDEMONA)    Oh,well-painted passion!     (To LODOVICO)    I am commanded home.    (To DESDEMONA)    Get you away,    Ill send for you anon.    (To LODOVICO)    Sir, I obey the mandate    And will return to Venice.    (To DESDEMONA)    Hence, avaunt!
Stanley, he is your wifes son. Well, look unto it.
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,    Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war    My thrice-driven bed of down.   I do agnize    A natural and prompt alacrity    I find in hardness, and do undertake    These present wars against the Ottomites.    Most humbly therefore bending to your state,    I crave fit disposition for my wife.    Due reference of place and exhibition,    With such accommodation and besort    As levels with her breeding.
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.
Either forbear,    Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you    For more amazement.   If you can behold it,    I'll make the statue move indeed, descend    And take you by the hand;   but then you'll think    Which I protest against   I am assisted    By wicked powers.
I think she means that there was more than oneConfederate in the fact: ay, more there was;Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.
By 'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.
Whats that, I pray?
He says he will return incontinent,And hath commanded me to go to bedAnd bid me to dismiss you.
Then give me leave that I may turn the key,That no man enter till my tale be done.
More matter for a May morning.
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes With nimble soles. I have a soul of leadSo stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
But see what heaven can do! By this our change,    These mouths, who but of late, earth, sea, and air,    Were all too little to content and please,    Although they gave their creatures in abundance,    As houses are defiled for want of use,    They are now starved for want of exercise:    Those palates who, not yet two summers younger,    Must have inventions to delight the taste,    Would now be glad of bread, and beg for it:    Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes,    Thought nought too curious, are ready now    To eat those little darlings whom they loved.    So sharp are hunger's teeth, that man and wife    Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life:    Here stands a lord, and there a lady weeping;    Here many sink, yet those which see them fall    Have scarce strength left to give them burial.    Is not this true?
[To TRANIO]  Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,Did you yet ever see Baptistas daughter?
Ay.
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
That dreamers often lie.
For Michael Cassio, I dare be sworn, I think, that he is honest.
Lucius' Servant And Sir Philotus too!
Your griefs! for what? wrong not your prince you love.
Here she lies, sir.
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;Yond crickets shall not hear it.
That he hath usèd thee.
'Tis much.Servants, leave me and her alone.Madam, undress you and come now to bed.
Madam, with all my heart.
Welcome, good brother.What do you think the hour?
[To ROMEO]  Away, begone. The sport is at the best.
I come, anon.But if thou meanst not well,I do beseech thee
There be some such, no question.
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business forus, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as muchmore and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.
Then call them to our presence;     face to face,    And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear    The accuser and the accused freely speak   :    High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire,    In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
Fare you well, gentlemen.  [she starts to exit]
No; that it is too little.
Oh, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is music with her silver sound because musicians have no gold for sounding.    [Sings]  Then music with her silver sound    With speedy help doth lend redress.
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeos hours?
There's never a one of you but trusts a knave,That mightily deceives you.
As well as one so great and so forlornMay hold together: on her frights and griefs,Which never tender lady hath born greater,She is something before her time deliver'd.
What is't, knave?
Go to:    Perchance some single vantages you took.    When my indispos ition put you back:    And that unaptness made your minister,    Thus to excuse yourself.
I' the name of me
Where is gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?
So do I ever  [aside]  being well-advised,For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.
My daughters mother thinks it with her soul.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.    [To the  MERCHANT  ]   Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of.    I pray you stand good father to me now.    Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
I understand thee; thou hadst some means to keep adog.
Well, sir, for want of other idleness, Ill bide your proof.
O sir, content you.    I follow him to serve my turn upon him.    We cannot all be masters, nor all masters    Cannot be truly followed.   You shall mark    Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave    That (doting on his own obsequious bondage)    Wears out his time much like his masters ass    For naught but provender, and when hes old, cashiered.    Whip me such honest knaves.   Others there are    Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,    Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves    And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,    Do well thrive by them.   And when they have lined their coats,    Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,    And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,    It is as sure as you are Roderigo,    Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago.    In following him, I follow but myself.    Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,    But seeming so, for my peculiar end.    For when my outward action doth demonstrate    The native act and figure of my heart    In compliment extern, tis not long after    But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve    For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.
Then cursed she Richard, then cursed she Buckingham.Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God,To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!And for my sister and her princely sons, Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,Which, as thou knowst, unjustly must be spilt.
Ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond,But Ill not trust thee.
You peasant swain! You whoreson malt-horse drudge!Did I not bid thee meet me in the parkAnd bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
No, misery makes sport to mock itself:    Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,    I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
[aside]  Praise in departing.
You may so; 'tis the better for you that your    resorters stand upon sound legs.   How now!    wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal    withal, and defy the surgeon?
Ay, but hell have but a year in all these ducats. Hesa very fool and a prodigal.
I am of your fear for that.
Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch,Thou friend of an ill fashion!
My comfort is that heaven will take our soulsAnd plague injustice with the pains of hell.
I know a discontented gentleman    Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit.    Gold were as good as twenty orators,    And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.
Whats here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?
Publius, how now! how now, my masters!What, have you met with her?
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal    The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,    The time shall not be many hours of age    More than it is ere foul sin gathering head    Shalt break into corruption:   thou shalt think,    Though he divide the realm and give thee half,    It is too little, helping him to all;    And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way    To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,    Being ne'er so little urged, another way    To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.    The love of wicked men converts to fear;    That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both    To worthy danger and deserved death.
O, you say well.
Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,    Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:    The sly slow hours shall not determinate    The dateless limit of thy dear exile;    The hopeless word of 'never to return'    Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
[to RICHARD]    The last was I that helped thee to the crown;    The last was I that felt thy tyranny.    O, in the battle think on Buckingham,    And die in terror of thy guiltiness.    Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death.    Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath.     [to RICHMOND]    I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid,    But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed.    God and good angels fight on Richmonds side,    And Richard fall in height of all his pride.
O, not by much.
Ay, sir: the other squirrel was stolen from me by    the hangman boys in the market-place:   and then I    offered her mine own, who is a dog as big as ten of    yours,   and therefore the gift the greater.
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Thither will I with you;   for little office    The hateful commons will perform for us,    Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.    Will you go along with us?
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? Whats your will?
I prithee, beat thy drum, and get thee gone.
The blessed gods    Purge all infection from our air whilst you    Do climate here!   You have a holy father,    A graceful gentleman; against whose person,    So sacred as it is, I have done sin:    For which the heavens, taking angry note,    Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,    As he from heaven merits it, with you    Worthy his goodness.   What might I have been,    Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,    Such goodly things as you!
By your leave, sir,
I am strong-framed. He cannot prevail with me.
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.
Lord, quoth he? That a monster should be such a natural!
Still confirmation:    Embrace him, dear Thaisa; this is he.    Now do I long to hear how you were found;    How possibly preserved; and who to thank,    Besides the gods, for this great miracle.
Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas    Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas;    Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,    And flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep;    Thy banks with pionèd and twillèd brims,    Which spongy April at thy hest betrims    To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy broom groves,    Whose shadow the dismissèd bachelor loves,    Being lass-lorn; thy pole-clipped vineyard;    And thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky hard,    Where thou thyself dost air   the Queen o' th' Sky,    Whose watery arch and messenger am I,    Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,    Here on this grass plot, in this very place,    To come and sport. Her peacocks fly amain.
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Be not afraid of greatness. 'Twas well writ.
How canst thou try them so?
And yet you halt not.
Thou speak'st like a physician, Helicanus,    That minister'st a potion unto me    That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.    Attend me, then: I went to Antioch,    Where as thou know'st, against the face of death,    I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty.    From whence an issue I might propagate,    Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects.    Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder;    The rest   hark in thine ear   as black as incest:    Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father    Seem'd not to strike, but smooth:     but thou    know'st this,    'Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss.    Such fear so grew in me, I hither fled,    Under the covering of a careful night,    Who seem'd my good protector; and, being here,    Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.    I knew him tyrannous; and tyrants' fears    Decrease not, but grow faster than the years:    And should he doubt it, as no doubt he doth,    That I should open to the listening air    How many worthy princes' bloods were shed,    To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,    To lop that doubt, he'll fill this land with arms,    And make pretence of wrong that I have done him:    When all, for mine, if I may call offence,    Must feel war's blow, who spares not innocence:    Which love to all, of which thyself art one,    Who now reprovest me for it,
[as Sir Topas]  Maintain no words with him, good fellow.  [in   his own voice]  Who, I, sir? Not I, sir. God b' wi' you, good Sir Topas.  [as Sir Topas]  Marry, amen.  [in hisown voice]  I will, sir, I will.
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.    Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,    I will appeach the villain.
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by thatwhich is left of him what he is, fetch me to thesight of him.
I have t in my nose too.
I speak no treason.
Well, I am standing water.
Am I a lord, and have I such a lady?    Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now?    I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak.    I smell sweet savors and I feel soft things.    Upon my life, I am a lord indeed    And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.    Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,    And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.
Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see t?
'Faith, I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish usof all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests.
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,Shut up in prison, kept without my food,Whipped and tormented andGood een, good fellow.
What is this same?
So do not I. Go, coward as thou art.    Well, Ill go hide the body in some hole    Till that the duke give order for his burial.    And when I have my meed, I will away,    For this will out, and then I must not stay.
Come, come, a hand from either:    Let me be blest to make this happy close;    'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
I shall accept them fairly; let the presentsBe worthily entertain'd.
And your horse now would make him an ass.
Good or bad news, that thou comst in so bluntly?
Truly, madam, he holds Beelzebub at the staves' end as well as a man in his case may do.   Has here writ a letterto you. I should have given t you today morning, but as a madmans epistles are no gospels, so it skills not much when they are delivered.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
No.
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;    Who hither come engaged by my oath    Which God defend a knight should violate!    Both to defend my loyalty and truth    To God, my king and my succeeding issue,    Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me    And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,    To prove him, in defending of myself,    A traitor to my God, my king, and me:    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,    Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.    Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais    Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers;    The other part reserved I by consent,    For that my sovereign liege was in my debt    Upon remainder of a dear account,    Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:    Now swallow down that lie.     For Gloucester's death,    I slew him not; but to my own disgrace    Neglected my sworn duty in that case.    For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,    The honourable father to my foe    Once did I lay an ambush for your life,    A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul    But ere I last received the sacrament    I did confess it, and exactly begg'd    Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.    This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd,    It issues from the rancour of a villain,    A recreant and most degenerate traitor    Which in myself I boldly will defend;    And interchangeably hurl down my gage    Upon this overweening traitor's foot,    To prove myself a loyal gentleman    Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.    In haste whereof, most heartily I pray    Your highness to assign our trial day.
To take is not to give.
A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue:    Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad    Amongst the fairest breeders of our clime:    The empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,    And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.
Nay, but you will?
The more shame for him that he sends it me;    For I have heard him say a thousand times    His Julia gave it him at his departure.    Though his false finger have profaned the ring,    Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate.Better once than never, for never too late.
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!    Thy fault our law calls death,   but the kind Prince,    Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law,    And turned that black word death to banishment.    This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Why, so he doth, when he delivers youFrom this earths thralldom to the joys of heaven.
Who has done this, Sir Andrew?
Alls well, sweeting,Come away to bed.  [To MONTANO]  Sir, for your hurtsMyself will be your surgeon. Lead him off.
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord
Our hope in him is dead: let us return,And strain what other means is left unto usIn our dear peril.
Good queen, my lord,Good queen; I say good queen;And would by combat make her good, so were IA man, the worst about you.
Please you, sir,    Do not omit the heavy offer of it.    It seldom visits sorrow. When it doth,    It is a comforter.
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life.
She would never tellHer parentage; being demanded that,She would sit still and weep.
[to FERDINAND]  Sweet lord, you play me false.
Say it be, 'tis true.
And, like a traitor to the name of God,Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade Unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereigns son.
What is his name?
This is much credit to you.
My most exquisite Sir Topas!
How now, philosopher!
We wait for certain money here, sir.
See, by good hap, yonder's my lord;I have sweat to see his honour. My honoured lord,
Please you, gentlemen,    The time is unagreeable to this business:    Your importunacy cease till after dinner,    That I may make his lordship understand    Wherefore you are not paid.
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants
Pray heavens he be,    For I have served him, and the man commands    Like a full soldier. Lets to the seaside, ho!    As well to see the vessel thats come in    As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,    Even till we make the main and th' aerial blue    An indistinct regard.
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparelta'en from me, and these detestable things put uponme.
[aside]  That will be never.  [To HORTENSIO]  Tune your instrument.
Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
Temperance was a delicate wench.
Sir Thomas Lovell and Lord Marquess Dorset,    'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.    But this good comfort bring I to your Highness:    The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest.    Richmond, in Dorsetshire, sent out a boat    Unto the shore to ask those on the banks    If they were his assistants, yea or no   Who answered him they came from Buckingham    Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,    Hoisted sail and made his course for Brittany.
Now, by the world
Push! did you see my cap?
If thou beest Prospero,    Give us particulars of thy preservation,    How thou hast met us here,   whom three hours since    Were wracked upon this shore, where I have lost    How sharp the point of this remembrance is!    My dear son Ferdinand.
O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!    Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,    Since riches point to misery and contempt?    Who would be so mock'd with glory? or to live    But in a dream of friendship?    To have his pomp and all what state compounds    But only painted, like his varnish'd friends?    Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,    Undone by goodness! Strange, unusual blood,    When man's worst sin is, he does too much good!    Who, then, dares to be half so kind again?    For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.    My dearest lord, bless'd, to be most accursed,    Rich, only to be wretched, thy great fortunes    Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!    He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat    Of monstrous friends, nor has he with him to    Supply his life, or that which can command it.    I'll follow and inquire him out:    I'll ever serve his mind with my best will;    Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.
Good my liege, I come;    And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess    Myself your loyal servant, your physician,    Your most obedient counsellor,   yet that dare    Less appear so in comforting your evils,    Than such as most seem yours:   I say, I come    From your good queen.
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.We will persuade him, be it possible,To put on better ere he go to church.
Its suppertime, my lord. Its nine o'clock.
What, have you lost your wits?
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.
Good! gramercy.
Peace, you mumbling fool!Utter your gravity oer a gossips bowl, For here we need it not.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the Nurse cursed in thepantry,   and every thing in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you, follow straight.
What! a knave too?
Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true    In this appeal as thou art all unjust;    And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,    To prove it on thee to the extremest point    Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.
Some other is more fit.
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy masters father, Vincentio?
Beat him enough. After a little time,Ill beat him too.
I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.Our friends at least.
I do conceive.
Why?
My heartLeaps to be gone into my mother's bosom.
You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.
Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my face? You are now out of your text.   But we will draw the curtain and show you the picture.   Look you, sir, such a one I was this present. Is t not well done?
[aside]  Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.  [To TAILOR]  Go, take it hence. Begone, and say no more.
Reverend appearer, no;I threw her overboard with these very arms.
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,Of these known evils but to give me leave By circumstance to curse thy cursèd self.
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear As howling after music.
[to FERDINAND]    You do look, my son, in a moved sort,    As if you were dismayed. Be cheerful, sir.    Our revels now are ended.   These our actors,    As I foretold you, were all spirits and    Are melted into air, into thin air.    And like the baseless fabric of this vision,    The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,    The solemn temples,   the great globe itself,    Ye all which it inherit, shall dissolve,    And like this insubstantial pageant faded,    Leave not a rack behind.   We are such stuff    As dreams are made on, and our little life    Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vexed.    Bear with my weakness. My old brain is troubled.    Be not disturbed with my infirmity.    If you be pleased, retire into my cell    And there repose. A turn or two Ill walk    To still my beating mind.
The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I learned from my entertainment.   What I am and what I would are assecret as maidenhead.   To your ears, divinity. To any others, profanation.
He shall not.
O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.
[seeing the apparel]  O King Stephano! O peer, O worthy Stephano, look what awardrobe here is for thee!
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
My lord, I do protest
He is coming.
Hes gone, but his wifes killed.
How courtesy would seem to cover sin,    When what is done is like an hypocrite,    The which is good in nothing but in sight!    If it be true that I interpret false,    Then were it certain you were not so bad    As with foul incest to abuse your soul;    Where now you're both a father and a son,    By your untimely claspings with your child,    Which pleasure fits an husband, not a father;    And she an eater of her mother's flesh,    By the defiling of her parent's bed;    And both like serpents are, who though they feed    On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.    Antioch, farewell! for wisdom sees, those men    Blush not in actions blacker than the night,    Will shun no course to keep them from the light.    One sin, I know, another doth provoke;    Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke:    Poison and treason are the hands of sin,    Ay, and the targets, to put off the shame:    Then, lest my lie be cropp'd to keep you clear,    By flight I'll shun the danger which I fear.
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,As he had seen't or been an instrumentTo vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queenForbiddenly.
We'll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown tomake thee a pair; and I'll bring thee to the court myself.
We wish your peace.
Whether this beOr be not, Ill not swear.
[as CAMBIO]  Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
Pardon us, sir; with us at sea it hath been still    observed: and we are strong in custom.   Therefore    briefly yield her; for she must overboard straight.
How do you now?
Nay, then you lie. It is the blessèd sun.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
Here comes that which grows to the stalk; neverplucked yet, I can assure you.
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,And that my fortune rubs against the bias.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Well, sir, I will; therefore, I will, sir; thus:    If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,    Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,    That Timon cares not.   But if be sack fair Athens,    And take our goodly aged men by the beards,    Giving our holy virgins to the stain    Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war,    Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,    In pity of our aged and our youth,    I cannot choose but tell him, that I care not,    And let him take't at worst;   for their knives care not,    While you have throats to answer: for myself,    There's not a whittle in the unruly camp    But I do prize it at my love before    The reverend'st throat in Athens.   So I leave you    To the protection of the prosperous gods,    As thieves to keepers.
My lord, you nod. You do not mind the play.
Yours by this hand. And to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife! She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.
[aside]   Nay, then, tis time to stir him from his trance.    I pray, awake, sir! If you love the maid,    Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her.   Thus it stands:    Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd    That till the father rid his hands of her,    Master, your love must live a maid at home,    And therefore has he closely mewed her up,    Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.
Some are born great
No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,    As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,    Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound    The open ear of youth doth always listen;    Report of fashions in proud Italy,    Whose manners still our tardy apish nation    Limps after in base imitation.    Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity    So it be new, there's no respect how vile    That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?    Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,    Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.    Direct not him whose way himself will choose:    'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.
And badest me bury love.
If they do see thee they will murder thee.
Alas, I took great pains to study it, and tis poetical.
Where the warlike Smalus,That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?
Ay, with Cassio. Had she been true,    If heaven would make me such another world    Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,    Id not have sold her for it.
Lucius, I will.
Where is my lord the duke of Gloucester?I have sent for these strawberries.
Her husband, knave. Wouldst thou betray me?
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,    Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter    Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,    And here another. The one of them imports    The death of Cassio to be undertook    By Roderigo.
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:    Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,    Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.    Your husband, he is gone to save far off,    Whilst others come to make him lose at home:    Here am I left to underprop his land,    Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:    Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;    Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.
I thank you, valiant Cassio.What tidings can you tell me of my lord?
Now, thieves?
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.
Indeed!
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke.
So; lift there.
When, Harry, when?Obedience bids I should not bid again.
And ours with thine, befall what fortune will.
Stay, then. Ill go alone. Fear comes upon me.Oh, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
By whose direction foundst thou out this place?
[as LUCENTIO]   Gremio, tis known my father hath no less    Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses,    And twelve tight galleys.   These I will assure her,    And twice as much whate'er thou offerst next.
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.Come, strike up!
Well, be't so, prithee.   [Exit Gaoler]  Here's such ado to make no stain a stainAs passes colouring.  [Re-enter Gaoler, with EMILIA]  Dear gentlewoman,How fares our gracious lady?
I dare assure you, sir, tis almost two,And twill be supper time ere you come there.
A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'dWith letters of your love to her at large.
They are.
No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,    My name be blotted from the book of life,    And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!    But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;    And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.    Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;    Save back to England, all the world's my way.
Art not one?
Strike, drum.
They love not poison that do poison need,    Nor do I thee:   though I did wish him dead,    I hate the murderer, love him murdered.    The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,    But neither my good word nor princely favour:    With Cain go wander through shades of night,    And never show thy head by day nor light.    Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,    That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:    Come, mourn with me for that I do lament,    And put on sullen black incontinent:    I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,    To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:    March sadly after; grace my mournings here;    In weeping after this untimely bier.
Patience, good sir,Even for this charge.
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly. A quarrel, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains!   That we should, with joy, pleasance revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.
Would all were wellbut that will never be.I fear our happiness is at the height.
And did you see the handkerchief?
Call you me daughter?   Now, I promise you    You have showed a tender fatherly regard    To wish me wed to one half lunatic,    A madcup ruffian and a swearing Jack,    That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
Oh, treacherous villains!  [To LODOVICO and GRATIANO]   What are you there? Come in, and give some help.
Of your complexion.
[Aside to SAMPSON]  Say better. Here comes one of my masters kinsmen.
Be it forbid, my lord!
Well, Ill put it on, and I will dissemble myself in t, and I would I were the first that ever dissembled insuch a gown.
O calm dishonourable, vile submission!Alla stoccata carries it away.  [Draws his sword]   Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here;    come, put it on; keep thee warm.   Now, afore me, a    handsome fellow!   Come, thou shalt go home,   and    we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for    fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks,    and thou shalt be welcome.
And on set purpose let his armour rustUntil this day, to scour it in the dust.
What hath he said?
Most likely, sir.
Stay not, all's in vain.
He neither does nor shall.
Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens    again, and flourish with the highest.   Therefore    'tis not amiss we tender our loves to him, in this    supposed distress of his:   it will show honestly in    us; and is very likely to load our purposes with    what they travail for, if it be a just true report    that goes of his having.
I know my remedy. I must go fetch the thirdborough.
What is the matter, uncle?   speak;    Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,    That we may arm us to encounter it.
Remember who commended thy yellow stockings
The offence is not of such a bloody nature;    Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel    Might well have given us bloody argument.    It might have since been answered in repaying    What we took from them, which, for traffics sake,    Most of our city did.   Only myself stood out;    For which, if I be lapsèd in this place,    I shall pay dear.
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed!
Madam, good hope. His grace speaks cheerfully.
Masterly done:The very life seems warm upon her lip.
I might call himA thing divine, for nothing naturalI ever saw so noble.
[sitting down]     Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,    Woes scene, worlds shame, graves due by life usurped,    Brief abstract and record of tedious days,    Rest thy unrest on Englands lawful earth,    Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
I am glad at heartTo be so rid o' the business.
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go seeif the bear be gone from the gentleman and how muchhe hath eaten: they are never curst but when theyare hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll buryit.
Down with him, thief!
What things in the world canst thou nearest compareto thy flatterers?
My lord, 'tis nothing.
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
Where should they be set else? He were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
Why me, Timon?
What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?
No.
How have you slept, my lord?
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire    That staggers thus my person.   Exton, thy fierce hand    Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.    Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;    Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
Heard you this, Gonzalo?
Not any yet:But as the unthought-on accident is guiltyTo what we wildly do, so we professOurselves to be the slaves of chance and fliesOf every wind that blows.
The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son To be your comforter when he is gone.
This interchange of love, I here protest,Upon my part shall be inviolable.
What shall we do else? Were we not born under Taurus?
Hang thyself!
Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy fathers dead,    Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief    Shore his old thread in twain.   Did he live now,    This sight would make him do a desperate turn,    Yea, curse his better angel from his side    And fall to reprobation.
Come, sir, away.
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,    Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing    Like bulls, or rather lions.   Did t not wake you?    It struck mine ear most terribly.
What, neither?
Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most modest terms,   for I am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself with courtesy.   Sayest thou that house is dark?
Is she so hot a shrew as shes reported?
Despiteful and intolerable wrongs!    Shall I endure this monstrous villany?    I know from whence this same device proceeds:    May this be borne?   as if his traitorous sons,    That died by law for murder of our brother,    Have by my means been butcher'd wrongfully!    Go, drag the villain hither by the hair;    Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege:    For this proud mock I'll be thy slaughterman;    Sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great,    In hope thyself should govern Rome and me.
Then plainly know my hearts dear love is set    On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.    As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,    And all combined, save what thou must combine    By holy marriage.   When and where and how    We met, we wooed and made exchange of vow,    Ill tell thee as we pass, but this I pray:    That thou consent to marry us today.
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'dThe shadow of your face.
To her, widow!
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
Hence! Hang not on my garments.
What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!
How blest am I    In my just censure, in my true opinion!    Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed    In being so blest!   There may be in the cup    A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,    And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge    Is not infected:   but if one present    The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known    How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,    With violent hefts. I have drunk,    and seen the spider.    Camillo was his help in this, his pander:    There is a plot against my life, my crown;    All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain    Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:    He has discover'd my design, and I    Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick    For them to play at will.   How came the posterns    So easily open?
About your years, my lord.
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?
And living too; for now his son is duke.
I say, my lord, that if I were a man,Their mother's bed-chamber should not be safeFor these bad bondmen to the yoke of Rome.
I have lost my gown.
Hes coming, madam; but in very strange manner. He is sure possessed, madam.
Not possible. For who shall bear your part    And be in Padua here Vincentios son,    Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,    Visit his countrymen and banquet them?
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soulBut I do love thee! And when I love thee notChaos is come again.
Oh, say so, and so be!
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.    You urged me as a judge; but I had rather    You would have bid me argue like a father.    O, had it been a stranger, not my child,    To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:    A partial slander sought I to avoid,    And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.    Alas, I look'd when some of you should say,    I was too strict to make mine own away;    But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue    Against my will to do myself this wrong.
Is t lost? Is t gone? Speak, is t out o' th' way?
Thou art like one of those fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword uponthe table and says God send me no need of thee!   and, by the operation of the second cup, draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.
It is an honor that I dream not of.
Faith, half asleep.
Content you, gentlemen. I will compound this strife.    'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both    That can assure my daughter greatest dower    Shall have my Biancas love.    Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
O, touch me not. I am not Stephano, but a cramp.
What sayst thou, noble heart?
Sirrah, hast thou a knife? come, let me see it.    Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration;    For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.    And when thou hast given it the emperor,    Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.
I thank him.
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Ill pay thy pleasure then.
My lord would speak. My duty hushes me.
Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs atale.
More than Prince of Cats. Oh, hes the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion.   He rests his minim restsone, two, and the third in your bosom.   The very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause.   Ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hai!
What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,    Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed    Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,    With slow but stately pace kept on his course,    Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee,    Bolingbroke!'    You would have thought the very windows spake,    So many greedy looks of young and old    Through casements darted their desiring eyes    Upon his visage, and that all the walls    With painted imagery had said at once    'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!'    Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,    Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,    Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:'    And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.
(  aside  ) Peace, I say.
Most heavenly music!It nips me unto listening, and thick slumberHangs upon mine eyes: let me rest.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuriesThat thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.
Well said, Hermione.
Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchios coming?
Why, why is this?    Thinkst thou Id make a life of jealousy,    To follow still the changes of the moon    With fresh suspicions? No! To be once in doubt    Is to be resolved.   Exchange me for a goat    When I shall turn the business of my soul    To such exsufflicate and blowed surmises,    Matching thy inference.   'Tis not to make me jealous    To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,    Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances.    Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.    Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw    The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,    For she had eyes and chose me.   No, Iago,    Ill see before I doubt, when I doubt, prove,    And on the proof there is no more but this:    Away at once with love or jealousy!
Marry, I saw your niece do more favors to the Counts servingman than ever she bestowed upon me. I sawt i'theorchard.
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed But that my coat is better than thou knowstI will make proof of thine.
Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.
A prince of Macedon, my royal father;    And the device he bears upon his shield    Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady;    The motto thus, in Spanish, 'Piu por dulzura que por fuerza.'
Mistrust it not, for sure AeacidesWas Ajax, called so from his grandfather.
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
I may so.
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,    To make my end too sudden:   learn, good soul,    To think our former state a happy dream;    From which awaked, the truth of what we are    Shows us but this:   I am sworn brother, sweet,    To grim Necessity, and he and I    Will keep a league till death.   Hie thee to France    And cloister thee in some religious house:    Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,    Which our profane hours here have stricken down.
Why, I pray you?
[sings in his own voice]    Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,    Tell me how thy lady does.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
(  aside  ) O, peace, peace!
Good my lord, be curedOf this diseased opinion, and betimes;For 'tis most dangerous.
He hath indeed, almost natural,   for besides that hes afool, hes a great quarreler,   and but that he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarreling,   tis thought among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
It is too late.  [he smothers her]
At my lodging.
Hadst thou groan'd for him    As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.    But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect    That I have been disloyal to thy bed,    And that he is a bastard, not thy son:    Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:    He is as like thee as a man may be,    Not like to me, or any of my kin,    And yet I love him.
What would my lord, but that he may not have,    Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?    Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
Father, tis thus: yourself and all the world    That talked of her have talked amiss of her.    If she be curst, it is for policy,    For shes not froward, but modest as the dove.    She is not hot, but temperate as the morn.    For patience she will prove a second Grissel,    And Roman Lucrece for her chastity.    And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together,    That upon Sunday is the wedding day.
Alas, what cry is that?
Good morrow, Catesby. You are early stirring.What news, what news in this our tott'ring state?
Lie thou there (throwing down a letter), for here comesthe trout that must be caught with tickling.
Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir?
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
I fear no uncles dead.
Forbear, forbear, I say! It is my lord the duke.Your grace is welcome to a man disgraced,Banished Valentine.
Oh, no, he goes into Mauritania and taketh away with him the fair Desdemona,   unless his abode be lingered here by some accidentwherein none can be so determinateas the removing of Cassio.
Her life is safest only in her birth.
O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!Love loving not itself none other can.
The honorable lady of the house, which is she?
You do yet taste    Some subtleties o' th' isle, that will not let you    Believe things certain.   Welcome, my friends all.     [aside to SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO]     But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded,    I here could pluck his highness' frown upon you    And justify you traitors.   At this time    I will tell no tales.
If you will not undo what you have donethat is, kill him whom you have recovereddesire it not.   Fare you wellat once. My bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell tales of me.   I am bound to the Count Orsinos court. Farewell.
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,    Which craves as desperate an execution    As that is desperate which we would prevent.    If, rather than to marry County Paris,    Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,    Then is it likely thou wilt undertake    A thing like death to chide away this shame,    That copest with death himself to scape from it.    An if thou darest, Ill give thee remedy.
Give us the place alone. We will hear this divinity.
I am the governor of this place you lie before.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art,    Since they do better thee in their command.    Thou hold'st a place, for which the pained'st fiend    Of hell would not in reputation change:    Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every    Coistrel that comes inquiring for his Tib;    To the choleric fisting of every rogue    Thy ear is liable; thy food is such    As hath been belch'd on by infected lungs.
Youll find it otherwise, I assure you.   Therefore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard,   for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath can furnish man withal.
She did show favor to the youth in your sight only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valor, to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.   You should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should have banged the youth into dumbness.   This was looked for at your hand, and this was balked.   The double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now sailed into the north of my ladys opinion, where you will hang like an icicle on a Dutchmans beard,   unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt either of valor or policy.
How now? Art thou mad?
Say no more:Howe'er the business goes, you have made faultI' the boldness of your speech.
Nay, good goose, bite not.
Richmond is on the seas.
O, by your leave, I pray you,    I bade you never speak again of him.    But, would you undertake another suit,    I had rather hear you to solicit that    Than music from the spheres.
I cry you mercy. Heres Cassio hurt by villains.
Reverend sir,    The gods can have no mortal officer    More like a god than you.   Will you deliver    How this dead queen re-lives?
Yes, keep you warm.
Thats a fault. That handkerchief    Did an Egyptian to my mother give,    She was a charmer and could almost read    The thoughts of people.   She told her, while she kept it    'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father    Entirely to her love, but if she lost it    Or made gift of it,   my fathers eye    Should hold her loathèd and his spirits should hunt    After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me    And bid me, when my fate would have me wived,    To give it her.   I did so, and take heed on t,    Make it a darling like your precious eye.    To lose t or give t away were such perdition    As nothing else could match.
Come, lets see the event.
Thats my office.
How now, Sir Proteus! How now, Turio!Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?
What follows this?How prettily the young swain seems to washThe hand was fair before! I have put you out:But to your protestation; let me hearWhat you profess.
Thats a degree to love.
Fetch Malvolio hither:    And yet, alas, now I remember me,    They say, poor gentleman, hes much distract.    A most extracting frenzy of mine own    From my remembrance clearly banished his.     (to FOOL)    How does he, sirrah?
Very well.
Ay, sir.
What, all so soon asleep? I wish mine eyesWould with themselves shut up my thoughts. I findThey are inclined to do so.
Under that's above me.Where feed'st thou o' days, Apemantus?
[waking and seeing them]  Now, good angels preserve the king!
Why, such is loves transgression.    Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,    Which thou wilt propagate, to have it pressed    With more of thine.   This love that thou hast shown    Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.    Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;    Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers eyes;    Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears.    What is it else? A madness most discreet,    A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.    Farewell, my coz.
And cursed be he that will not second it.
And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
Not having that which, having, makes them short.
Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer'swife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at aburthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads andtoads carbonadoed.
My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace,    But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,    All circumstances well considerèd.    You say that Edward is your brothers son;    So say we too, but not by Edwards wife.    For first was he contract to Lady Lucy    Your mother lives a witness to that vow    And afterward by substitute betrothed    To Bona, sister to the king of France.    These both put off, a poor petitioner,    A care-crazed mother to a many sons,    A beauty-waning and distressèd widow,    Even in the afternoon of her best days,    Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye,    Seduced the pitch and height of his degree    To base declension and loathed bigamy.    By her in his unlawful bed he got    This Edward, whom our manners term the Prince.    More bitterly could I expostulate,    Save that, for reverence to some alive,    I give a sparing limit to my tongue.    Then, good my lord, take to your royal self    This proffered benefit of dignity,    If not to bless us and the land withal,    Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry    From the corruption of abusing times    Unto a lineal, true-derivèd course.
Nay, I dare not swear it.
May you a better feast never behold,    You knot of mouth-friends I smoke and lukewarm water    Is your perfection.   This is Timon's last;    Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,    Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces    Your reeking villany.
Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, lady, lady, lady.
Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity    To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.    'Twas her two sons that murder'd Bassianus;    They cut thy sister's tongue and ravish'd her    And cut her hands and trimm'd her as thou saw'st.
I must perforce. Farewell.
Proceed:No foot shall stir.
[Aside]   My only love sprung from my only hate!    Too early seen unknown, and known too late!    Prodigious birth of love it is to me,    That I must love a loathèd enemy.
Blessed figs-end! The wine she drinks is made of grapes. If she had been blessed, she would never have loved the Moor.   Blessed pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst not mark that?
Well, well; as for him, he brought his disease    hither: here he does but repair it.   I know he will    come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the    sun.
Was't so?
Banish me!Banish your dotage; banish usury,That makes the senate ugly.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
An thou hadst hated meddlers sooner, thou shouldsthave loved thyself better now. What man didst thouever know unthrift that was beloved after his means?
It is. May it be done?
Whats the matter?
How now, who calls?
Sir, my mistress sends you wordThat she is busy, and she cannot come.
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
O, my heart!
Lay her a-hold, a-hold! Set her two courses off to sea again.Lay her off!
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Ay, so we will.
Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.
I embrace you.    Give me my robes. I am wild in my beholding.    O heavens bless my girl!   But, hark, what music?    Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him    O'er, point by point, for yet he seems to doubt,    How sure you are my daughter.   But, what music?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,    Speak, and look back, and pry on every side,    Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,    Intending deep suspicion.   Ghastly looks    Are at my service, like enforcèd smiles,    And both are ready in their offices,    At any time to grace my stratagems.    But what, is Catesby gone?
For ever may my knees grow to the earth,My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouthUnless a pardon ere I rise or speak.
[Aside]  Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.
Then move not, while my prayers effect I take.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on t. Now if this suit lay in Biancas powerHow quickly should you speed!
'Tis not a year or two shows us a man.    They are all but stomachs, and we all but food.    To eat us hungerly, and when they are full,    They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband!
Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.
[joining them]    If ancient sorrow be most reverend,    Give mine the benefit of seigniory,    And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.    If sorrow can admit society,    Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine.    I had an Edward till a Richard killed him;    I had a husband till a Richard killed him.    Thou hadst an Edward till a Richard killed him;    Thou hadst a Richard till a Richard killed him.
If God prevent not, I purpose so.
I prithee, gentle friend,    Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway    In this uncivil and unjust extent    Against thy peace.   Go with me to my house,    And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks    This ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby    Mayst smile at this.   Thou shalt not choose but go.    Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me!    He started one poor heart of mine in thee.
And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crown'd,    That I account them blessings; for by these    Shall I try friends:   you shall perceive how you    Mistake my fortunes; I am wealthy in my friends.    Within there! Flaminius! Servilius!
Six frozen winter spent,Return with welcome home from banishment.
Madam, please you peruse this letter.    Pardon me, madam;   I have unadvised    Deliver'd you a paper that I should not:    This is the letter to your ladyship.
Not this hour, lieutenant, tis not yet ten o' the clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemonawho let us not therefore blame.   He hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sportfor Jove.
At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.
I pray thee, moralize them.
I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
O true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straightThe greatest strength and power that he can make And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
I chafe you, if I tarry. Let me go.
Oh, was she so? I must    Once in a month recount what thou hast been,    Which thou forgetst.   This damned witch Sycorax,    For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible    To enter human hearing, from Argier,    Thou knowst, was banished.   For one thing she did    They would not take her life. Is not this true?
Your Honors players, hearing your amendment,    Are come to play a pleasant comedy,    For so your doctors hold it very meet,    Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood,    And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy.    Therefore they thought it good you hear a play    And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,    Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.
Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order.
Has almost charmed me from my profession, bypersuading me to it.
I am to blame.
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,    Nor no man's lord;   I have no name, no title,    No, not that name was given me at the font,    But 'tis usurp'd:   alack the heavy day,    That I have worn so many winters out,    And know not now what name to call myself!    O that I were a mockery king of snow,    Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,    To melt myself away in water-drops!    Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,  An if my word be sterling yet in England,  Let it command a mirror hither straight,    That it may show me what a face I have,    Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
[to SEBASTIAN]  Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
[t    o  VIOLA   ]  I must entreat of you some of that money.
If I should be? I had rather be a peddler. Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.
What a full fortune does the Thick-lips oweIf he can carryt thus!
This wind you talk of, blows us from ourselves.Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
You mistake, knight. Accost is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.
Thy gown? Why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see t.    O mercy, God! What masking stuff is here?    Whats this? A sleeve? 'Tis like a demi-cannon.    What, up and down, carved like an apple tart?    Heres snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,    Like to a censer in a barbers shop.    Why, what i' devils name, tailor, callst thou this?
Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in,    I will continue that I broached in jest.    I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife    With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,    Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman.    Her only fault, and that is faults enough,    Is that she is intolerable curst,    And shrewd and froward,   so beyond all measure    That, were my state far worser than it is,    I would not wed her for a mine of gold.
But, for your conscience?
They confess    Toward thee forgetfulness too general, gross:    Which now the public body, which doth seldom    Play the recanter, feeling in itself    A lack of Timon's aid, hath sense withal    Of its own fail, restraining aid to Timon;    And send forth us, to make their sorrow'd render,    Together with a recompense more fruitful    Than their offence can weigh down by the dram;    Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth    As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs    And write in thee the figures of their love,    Ever to read them thine.
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
Blest, and mine own!
Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Wheres my cousin Toby?   Let some of my people have a special care of him. I would not have him miscarry for the half of mydowry.
Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond    That he is bound to?   Wife, thou art a fool.    Boy, let me see the writing.
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter, husband?
Come, poor babe:    I have heard, but not believed,    the spirits o' the dead    May walk again:   i   f such thing be, thy mother    Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream    So like a waking.   To me comes a creature,    Sometimes her head on one side, some another;    I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,    So fill'd and so becoming:   in pure white robes,    Like very sanctity, she did approach    My cabin where I lay; thrice bow'd before me,    And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes    Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon    Did this break-from her:   'Good Antigonus,    Since fate, against thy better disposition,    Hath made thy person for the thrower-out    Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,    Places remote enough are in Bohemia,    There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe    Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,    I prithee, call't.   For this ungentle business    Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see    Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks    She melted into air.   Affrighted much,    I did in time collect myself and thought    This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:    Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,    I will be squared by this.   I do believe    Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that    Apollo would, this being indeed the issue    Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,    Either for life or death, upon the earth    Of its right father.   Blossom, speed thee well!    There lie, and there thy character: there these;    Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,    And still rest thine.   The storm begins; poor wretch,    That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed    To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,    But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I    To be by oath enjoin'd to this.   Farewell!    The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have    A lullaby too rough: I never saw    The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!    Well may I get aboard!   This is the chase:    I am gone for ever.
But half an hour!
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,    Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;    For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,    Divides one thing entire to many objects;    Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon    Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry    Distinguish form:   so your sweet majesty,    Looking awry upon your lord's departure,    Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail;    Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows    Of what it is not.   Then, thrice-gracious queen,    More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen;    Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,    Which for things true weeps things imaginary.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brothers child!    O Prince! O cousin! Husband! Oh, the blood is spilled    Of my dear kinsman!   Prince, as thou art true,    For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.    O cousin, cousin!
O detestable villain! call'st thou that trimming?
You tempt him over-much.
Ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do I too.He does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.
He is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing it.
An he speak any thing against me, Ill take him down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks.    And if I cannot, Ill find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills. I am none of his skains-mates.   [To PETER]   And thou must stand by, too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
(  aside  ) Now is the woodcock near the gin.
Welcome, my lord. I dance attendance here.I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
Mistress!
To murder me?
If I should tell my history, it would seemLike lies disdain'd in the reporting.
Yes, that the king is dead.
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.Have to my widow, and if she be froward, Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
Out and alas, that was my ladys voice.
What, for being a puritan? Thy exquisite reason, dear knight?
Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these gifts a curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like Mistress Malls picture?   Why dost thou not go to church in a galliard and come home in a coranto?   My verywalk should be a jig. I would not so much as make waterbut in a sink-a-pace.   What dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in?   I did think, by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star ofa galliard.
My noble general, Timon is dead;    Entomb'd upon the very hem o' the sea;    And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which    With wax I brought away, whose soft impression    Interprets for my poor ignorance.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Catesby, I come. Lords, will you go with me?
I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point:Nurse, give it me; my sword shall soon dispatch it.
Give me my boots, I say.
'Tis well bethought.    She questionless with her sweet harmony    And other chosen attractions, would allure,    And make a battery through his deafen'd parts,    Which now are midway stopp'd:    She is all happy as the fairest of all,    And, with her fellow maids is now upon    The leafy shelter that abuts against    The island's side.
Is not this man jealous?
Come, where be these gallants? Whos at home?
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot withconscience take it.
Why, but you are now well enough. How came you thus recovered?
And so is now, or was so very late.    For but a month ago I went from hence,    And then twas fresh in murmur   as, you know,    What great ones do the less will prattle of    That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
Royal cheer, I warrant you.
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the oldshepherd deliver the manner how he found it:whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were allcommanded out of the chamber; only this methought Iheard the shepherd say, he found the child.
(sings) What an if you do?
Who intercepts my expedition?
Why, whats the matter?
Your servant and your friend;One that attends your ladyship's command.
So please your Lordship to accept our duty.
To satisfy my lady.
Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?
There is not only disgrace and dishonor in that, monster, but an infinite loss.
And so did I.
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
No; I eat not lords.
No, I will rob Tellus of her weed,    To strew thy green with flowers: the yellows, blues,    The purple violets, and marigolds,    Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave,    While summer-days do last.   Ay me! poor maid,    Born in a tempest, when my mother died,    This world to me is like a lasting storm,    Whirring me from my friends.
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.
Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.
[as LITIO]  Madam, tis now in tune.
Go with me to the vault.
Will you tell me that?His son was but a ward two years ago.
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
Well, my good lord.
I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand strong,or so.
Thou art not altogether a fool.
Why, she was wash'd and cut and trimm'd, and 'twasTrim sport for them that had the doing of it.
My lord, there needs no such apology.    I do beseech your Grace pardon me,    Who, earnest in the service of my God,    Deferred the visitation of my friends.    But, leaving this, what is your Graces pleasure?
Almost as well as I do know myself:To think upon her woes I do protestThat I have wept a hundred several times.
O, peace, Paulina!    Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,    As I by thine a wife:   this is a match,    And made between's by vows.   Thou hast found mine;    But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,    As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many    A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far    For him, I partly know his mind   to find thee    An honourable husband.   Come, Camillo,    And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty    Is richly noted and here justified    By us, a pair of kings.   Let's from this place.    What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,    That e'er I put between your holy looks    My ill suspicion.   This is your son-in-law,    And son unto the king, who, heavens directing,    Is troth-plight to your daughter.   Good Paulina,    Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely    Each one demand an answer to his part    Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first    We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.
Why, that was when    Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,    Ere I could make thee open thy white hand    And clap thyself my love:   then didst thou utter    'I am yours for ever.'
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until    You have drawn oaths from him not to stay.   You, sir,    Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure    All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction    The by-gone day proclaim'd:   say this to him,    He's beat from his best ward.
A most unworthy and unnatural lordCan do no more.
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?But who comes here?
The old priest at Saint Lukes Church is at your command at all hours.
Then put up your pipes in your bag, for Ill away. Go, vanish into air, away!
The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;    For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.
Why, sir?
It alone concerns your ear.   I bring no overture of war,no taxation of homage. I hold the olive in my hand   . My words are as full of peace as matter.
[To a SERVINGMAN]  What lady is that which doth enrich the handOf yonder knight?
Oh, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Will t please your Mightiness to wash your hands?    O, how we joy to see your wit restored!    O, that once more you knew but what you are!    These fifteen years you have been in a dream    Or, when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
He could not miss t.
[To VINCENTIO]   Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.   Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell Signior Lucentio that hisfather is come from Pisa and is here at the door to speak with him.
A most high miracle!
By innocence I swear, and by my youth    I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth,    And that no woman has, nor never none    Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.    And so adieu, good madam. Nevermore    Will I my masters tears to you deplore.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eyeThan twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,And I am proof against their enmity.
I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking,    So full of valor that they smote the air    For breathing in their faces, beat the ground    For kissing of their feet;   yet always bending    Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor,    At which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their ears,    Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses    As they smelt music.   So I charmed their ears    That, calflike, they my lowing followed through    Toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and thorns,    Which entered their frail shins.   At last I left them    I' th' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell,    There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake    O'erstunk their feet.
A devil.
Old sir, I know    She prizes not such trifles as these are:    The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd    Up in my heart; which I have given already,    But not deliver'd.   O, hear me breathe my life    Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,    Hath sometime loved!   I take thy hand, this hand,    As soft as dove's down and as white as it,    Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd    snow that's bolted    By the northern blasts twice o'er.
O Stephano, hast any more of this?
I look down towards his feet, but thats a fable.If that thou best a devil, I cannot kill thee.
Joy had the like conception in our eyesAnd at that instant like a babe sprung up.
She thinks not so; peruse this writing else.
M.O.A.I. This simulation is not as the former, and yet to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of these letters are in my name. Soft, here follows prose.    [reads]    If this fall into thy hand, revolve.   In my stars I am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness. Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em.   Thy Fates open their hands. Let thy blood and spirit embrace them. And, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy humble slough and appear fresh.   Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants. Let thy tongue tang arguments of state. Put thyself into the trick of singularity.   She thus advises thee that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered. I say, remember.   Go to, thou art made, if thou desirst to be so; if not, let me see theea steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthyto touch Fortunes fingers.   Farewell. She that would alter services with thee,    The Fortunate Unhappy    Daylight and champaign discovers not more. This is open.   I will be proud, I will read politic authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point- devise the very man.   I donot now fool myself, to let imagination jade me, for every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me.   Shedid commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praisemy leg being cross-gartered, and in this she manifests herself to my love, and with a kind of injunction, drives me to these habits of her liking.   I thank my stars I am happy. I will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yeta postscript.    [reads]    Thou canst not choose but know who I am.   If thou entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling. Thy smiles become thee well.   Therefore in my presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee.    Jove, I thank thee! I will smile. I will do everything that thou wilt have me.
Give me now leave to leave thee.
I am appointed him to murder you.
My nieces chambermaid.
Hark, how these instruments summon to supper. The messengers of Venice stays the meat.Go in, and weep not. All things shall be well.
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;    Spur post, and get before him to the king,    And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.    I'll not be long behind; though I be old,    I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:    And never will I rise up from the ground    Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone!
So I amto let him live.
Madam, I will.
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,Hark in thine ear.  [whispers to ARIEL]
Good madam, whats the matter with my lord?
Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them?
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.Lend me thy handkerchief.
In faith, too much.    I find it still, when I have leave to sleep.    Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,    She puts her tongue a little in her heart    And chides with thinking.
What, prithee?
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?    If I know how or which way to order these affairs    Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,    Never believe me.   Both are my kinsmen:    The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath    And duty bids defend; the other again    Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd,    Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.    Well, somewhat we must do.   Come, cousin, I'll    Dispose of you.    Gentlemen, go, muster up your men,    And meet me presently at Berkeley.    I should to Plashy too;    But time will not permit: all is uneven,    And every thing is left at six and seven.
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.
Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody thoughts.
Will you walk, sir?O Desdemona
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.    What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights?    Eight score eight hours?   And lovers' absent hours    More tedious than the dial eightscore times!    Oh weary reckoning!
I think so. Kill'd!    She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me    Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter    Upon thy tongue as in my thought:   now, good now,    Say so but seldom.
Then I am paid;    And once again I do receive thee honest.    Who by repentance is not satisfied    Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased.    By penitence the Eternal's wrath's appeased:    And, that my love may appear plain and free,    All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne    In him, a royal prince, and many more    Of noble blood in this declining land.    The king is not himself, but basely led    By flatterers;   and what they will inform,    Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all,    That will the king severely prosecute    'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
Ill sell all my land.
[To BIONDELLO]  Come hither, crack-hemp.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he hauntswakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
Come, Marcus, let us go. Publius, follow me.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.I see a woman may be made a foolIf she had not a spirit to resist.
How now, Roderigo!
My actions are as noble as my thoughts,    That never relish'd of a base descent.    I came unto your court for honour's cause,    And not to be a rebel to her state;    And he that otherwise accounts of me,    This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy.
Go, girl. I cannot blame thee now to weep,For such an injury would vex a very saint,Much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
Not so, sir, I do care for something. But in my conscience, sir, I do not care for you.   If that be to care for nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.
Wherefore, sweetheart? Whats your metaphor?
Nay then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
[aside]  Did not I say he would work it out? The cur is excellent at faults.
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory    Can from his mother win the duke of York,    Anon expect him here;   but if she be obdurate    To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid    We should infringe the holy privilege    Of blessèd sanctuary!   Not for all this land    Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.
Spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. Come, shall we fall to work?
Every mans conscience is a thousand men,To fight against this guilty homicide.
Look where the youngest wren of nine comes.
What wouldst thou now? If thou darest tempt me further,draw thy sword.
Go, do our bidding; hence!
You must needs dine with me: go not you henceTill I have thank'd you: when dinner's done,Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine, and therefore fire! Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
How now, what news?
O gentle Aaron, we are all undone!Now help, or woe betide thee evermore!
You can fool no more money out of me at this throw.   If you will let your lady know I am here to speak with her,and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made    More homely than thy state.   For thee, fond boy,    If I may ever know thou dost but sigh    That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never    I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession;    Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,    Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:    Follow us to the court.   Thou churl, for this time,    Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee    From the dead blow of it.   And you, enchantment.    Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,    That makes himself, but for our honour therein,    Unworthy thee,   if ever henceforth thou    These rural latches to his entrance open,    Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,    I will devise a death as cruel for thee    As thou art tender to't.
No matter where; of comfort no man speak:    Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;    Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes    Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,    Let's choose executors and talk of wills:    And yet not so, for what can we bequeath    Save our deposed bodies to the ground?    Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's,    And nothing can we call our own but death    And that small model of the barren earth    Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.    For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground    And tell sad stories of the death of kings;    How some have been deposed; some slain in war,    Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;    Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd;    All murder'd:   for within the hollow crown    That rounds the mortal temples of a king    Keeps Death his court   and there the antic sits,    Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,    Allowing him a breath, a little scene,    To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks,    Infusing him with self and vain conceit,    As if this flesh which walls about our life,    Were brass impregnable,   and humour'd thus    Comes at the last and with a little pin    Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!    Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood    With solemn reverence: throw away respect,    Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,    For you have but mistook me all this while:    I live with bread like you, feel want,    Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,    How can you say to me, I am a king?
Despair not, madam.
You breathe in vain.
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.
Lucentio! Oh, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold on him, I charge you in the Dukes name. O my son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?
Patience, I say. Your mind may change.
What courage, sir? God save you!
Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too muchhomely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.    The secret mischiefs that I set abroach    I lay unto the grievous charge of others.    Clarence, whom I indeed have cast in darkness,    I do beweep to many simple gulls,    Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham,    And tell them tis the queen and her allies    That stir the king against the duke my brother.    Now they believe it and withal whet me    To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey;    But then I sigh and, with a piece of scripture,    Tell them that God bids us do good for evil;    And thus I clothe my naked villainy    With odd old ends stolen out of Holy Writ,    And seem a saint when most I play the devil.
I thank my liege, that in regard of me    He shortens four years of my son's exile:    But little vantage shall I reap thereby;    For, ere the six years that he hath to spend    Can change their moons and bring their times about    My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light    Shall be extinct with age and endless night;    My inch of taper will be burnt and done,    And blindfold death not let me see my son.
The gods confound them all in thy conquest;And thee after, when thou hast conquer'd!
Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape,    And with a virtuous visor hide deep vice.    He is my son, ay, and therein my shame,    Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.
Fool!
Dearly my delicate Ariel. Do not approachTill thou dost hear me call.
Nor thou altogether a wise man: as much foolery asI have, so much wit thou lackest.
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,    But presently prevent the ways to wail.    To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,    Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,    And so your follies fight against yourself.    Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight:    And fight and die is death destroying death;    Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
Excellent good, i' faith.
He that dies pays all debts.I defy thee!Mercy upon us!
What handkerchief?Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,That which so often you did bid me steal.
I am in my condition    A prince, MirandaI do think, a king;    I would, not so!and would no more endure    This wooden slavery than to suffer    The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak.    The very instant that I saw you did    My heart fly to your service, there resides    To make me slave to it, and for your sake    Am I this patient log-man.
I cry you mercy, then,    I took you for that cunning whore of Venice    That married with Othello.   You, mistress,    That have the office opposite to Saint Peter    And keep the gate of hell!
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom.    Advance our standards. Set upon our foes.    Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,    Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons.    Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.
I must away today, before night come.    Make it no wonder.   If you knew my business,    You would entreat me rather go than stay.    And, honest company, I thank you all,    That have beheld me give away myself    To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife.    Dine with my father, drink a health to me,    For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the city?
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.
Like a drowned man, a fool and a madman. One draught above heat makes him a fool, the second mads him, and a third drowns him.
Ay, lord. She will become thy bed, I warrant.And bring thee forth brave brood.
In the wars. And that may you be bold to say in your foolery.
Well, do your discretion.
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,To-day, as I came by, I called there;But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
My lord, I warrant you we will play our partAs he shall think by our true diligenceHe is no less than what we say he is.
To him, Sir Topas.
[Aside]  A pretty moral.
[Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaintmay be to the flight of my master.
Humbly I thank your lordship: never mayThe state or fortune fall into my keeping,Which is not owed to you!
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,    Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,    Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,    And in despite Ill cram thee with more food!    [Begins to opens the tomb with his tools]
I take it up; and by that sword I swear    Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,    I'll answer thee in any fair degree,    Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:    And when I mount, alive may I not light,    If I be traitor or unjustly fight!
An if it please thee! why, assure thee, Lucius,    'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak;    For I must talk of murders, rapes and massacres,    Acts of black night, abominable deeds,    Complots of mischief, treason, villanies    Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform'd:    And this shall all be buried by my death,    Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.
As I! Fie upon thee!
What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
Then honour be but a goal to my will,This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill.
I did say so    When first I raised the tempest.   Say, my spirit,    How fares the king and s followers?
Farewell, farewell.If more thou dost perceive, let me know more. Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
And so was I. Ill bear you company.
It is so.
Next, he's the governor of this country, and a manwhom I am bound to.
What sayest thou?
Apt, in good faith, very apt. Well, go thy way.   If Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece ofEves flesh as any in Illyria.
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it!    Who is it that complains unto the king    That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?    By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly    That fill his ears with such dissentious rumors.    Because I cannot flatter and look fair,    Smile in mens faces, smooth, deceive and cog,    Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,    I must be held a rancorous enemy.    Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,    But thus his simple truth must be abused    With silken, sly, insinuating jacks?
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught    My frail mortality to know itself,    And by those fearful objects to prepare    This body, like to them, to what I must;    For death remember'd should be like a mirror,    Who tells us life's but breath, to trust it error.    I'll make my will then, and, as sick men do    Who know the world, see heaven, but, feeling woe,    Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did;    So I bequeath a happy peace to you    And all good men, as every prince should do;    My riches to the earth from whence they came;     [To the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS]     But my unspotted fire of love to you.    Thus ready for the way of life or death,    I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.
No, believe me.
And the rarest that e'er came there.
(  aside  ) Ah, rogue!
'Tis much deep: and it should seem by the sun,Your master's confidence was above mine;Else, surely, his had equall'd.
It seems you loved not her, to leave her token.She is dead, belike?
Speak within door.
Ill wait upon your Lordship.
Nay, good, be patient.
He has a little galled me, I confess.And, as the jest did glance away from me,'Tis ten to one it maimed you two outright.
It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.
If it be that
Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee straight    Adonis painted by a running brook    And Cytherea all in sedges hid,    Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,    Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
Oh, heavens forfend!
Fool, fool, fool, I say!
Well, more gold: what then?Believe't, that we'll do any thing for gold.
Here, most gracious liege.
You may say it, but not swear it.
I tell thee, man, tis better with me now    Than when thou metst me last where now we meet.    Then was I going prisoner to the Tower    By the suggestion of the queens allies.    But now, I tell theekeep it to thyself    This day those enemies are put to death,    And I in better state than e'er I was.
Why, I am glad on t. This is well. Stand up.
Unto the dignity and height of fortune, The high imperial type of this earths glory.
Flaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my lord ready tocome forth?
Then hes a rogue, and a passy-measures pavin. I hate adrunken rogue.
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
I say, my lords, he has done fair service,    And slain in fight many of your enemies:    How full of valour did he bear himself    In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!
I do I know not what and fear to find    Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.    Fate, show thy force. Ourselves we do not owe.    What is decreed must be, and be this so.
We thank your Honor.
A noble spirit!
God i good een. I pray, sir, can you read?
Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?
It is; you lie, you lie:    I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,    Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,    Or else a hovering temporizer, that    Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,    Inclining to them both:   were my wife's liver    Infected as her life, she would not live    The running of one glass.
Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.
An honest poor servant of yours.
Wherefore?
Heres packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
O my good lord, yonders foul murders done!
The ground is bloody.Search about the churchyard.Go, some of you. Whoeer you find, attach.
I had forgot myself; am I not king?    Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.    Is not the king's name twenty thousand names?    Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes    At thy great glory.   Look not to the ground,    Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?    High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York    Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?
So will it, madam till I lie with you.
[To VINCENTIO]    Good morrow, gentle mistress, where away?    Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,    Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?    Such war of white and red within her cheeks!    What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty    As those two eyes become that heavenly face?    Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.    Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beautys sake.
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.
I know't too well.Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:Though he does bear some signs of me, yet youHave too much blood in him.
Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.    Even now I curse the dayand yet, I think,    Few come within the compass of my curse,    Wherein I did not some notorious ill,    As kill a man, or else devise his death,    Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it,    Accuse some innocent and forswear myself,    Set deadly enmity between two friends,    Make poor men's cattle break their necks;    Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night,    And bid the owners quench them with their tears.    Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their graves,    And set them upright at their dear friends' doors,    Even when their sorrows almost were forgot;    And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,    Have with my knife carved in Roman letters,    'Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.'    Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things    As willingly as one would kill a fly,    And nothing grieves me heartily indeed    But that I cannot do ten thousand more.
Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him:    You must consider that a prodigal course    Is like the sun's; but not, like his, recoverable.    I fear 'tis deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse;    That is one may reach deep enough, and yet    Find little.
To do what?
Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,    Suddenly taken;   and hath sent post haste    To entreat your majesty to visit him.
We are but plain fellows, sir.
The king and prince at prayers. Lets assist them, for our case is as theirs.
To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield;And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,We with our travels will endeavour us.
'Tis very true: you were in presence then;And you can witness with me this is true.
Do ye triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?
What is the matter?
How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath    To say to me that thou art out of breath?    The excuse that thou dost make in this delay    Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.    Is thy news good, or bad? Answer to that.    Say either, and Ill stay the circumstance.    Let me be satisfied. Is t good or bad?
What is the business?
Ay, and a kind one too.Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
Is it no more to be your daughter than    To say my mother's name was Thaisa?    Thaisa was my mother, who did end    The minute I began.
In his bosom? In what chapter of his bosom?
You may, sir. 'Tis a point of wisdom. Fare you well.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.
How now! canst stand?
They are loves I bear to you.
At that sad stop, my lord,    Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops    Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.
On your allegiance,Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,Where were her life? she durst not call me so,If she did know me one. Away with her!
Well thought upon. I have it here about me.     [He gives a paper]     When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.    But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,    Withal obdurate;   do not hear him plead,    For Clarence is well-spoken and perhaps    May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
Nay, good lieutenant! Alas, gentlemenHelp, ho! Lieutenantsir, MontanoHelp, masters!Heres a goodly watch indeed!
Zounds, he dies! I had forgot the reward.
Why, what is it, my lord?
I beg of you to know me, good my lord,To accept my grief and whilst this poor wealth lastsTo entertain me as your steward still.
[aside]  Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.
No, I warrant you. I will not adventure my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh me asleep, for I am very heavy?
See where she comes and brings your froward wives    As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.    Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not.    Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
I partly know the man. Go, call him hither, boy
My lord, there is a messenger from RomeDesires to be admitted to your presence.
[to FERDINAND and MIRANDA]  Give me your hands.Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heartThat doth not wish you joy.
[To TYBALT]  Up, sir, go with me.I charge thee in the Princes name, obey.
Ay, traitor.
If you would not so,    You pity not the state, nor the remembrance    Of his most sovereign name; consider little    What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue,    May drop upon his kingdom and devour    Incertain lookers on.   What were more holy    Than to rejoice the former queen is well?    What holier than, for royalty's repair,    For present comfort and for future good,    To bless the bed of majesty again    With a sweet fellow to't?
I do beseech you either not believe    The envious slanders of her false accusers,    Or if she be accused in true report,    Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds    From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
How! Julia!
That she is living,    Were it but told you, should be hooted at    Like an old tale:   but it appears she lives,    Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.    Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel    And pray your mother's blessing.   Turn, good lady;    Our Perdita is found.
Fare thee well, fare thee well.
So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again,My Alcibiades. With me? what is your will?
I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster.A most scurvy monster. I could find in my heart to beathim
Good my lord, pardon me,    Though I am bound to every act of duty    I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.    Utter my thoughts?   Why, say they are vile and false,    As wheres that palace whereinto foul things    Sometimes intrude not?   Who has that breast so pure    Wherein uncleanly apprehensions    Keep leets and law-days and in sessions sit    With meditations lawful?
Why dost thou cry 'alas'?
But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would havebeen that day in the belfry.
[Aside]  Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
How, sir? How?
Good, speak to th' mariners. Fall to t yarely, or we run ourselves aground. Bestir, bestir.
Nor I.
Toad!
'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.
Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
The worser welcome.    I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors.    In honest plainness thou hast heard me say    My daughter is not for thee.   And now in madness,    Being full of supper and distempering drafts,    Upon malicious knavery dost thou come    To start my quiet?
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, willyou use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.
I am a very villain else.
There's time enough for that;    Lest they desire upon this push to trouble    Your joys with like relation. Go together,    You precious winners all; your exultation    Partake to every one.   I, an old turtle,    Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there    My mate, that's never to be found again,    Lament till I am lost.
I will not rise unless your Highness hear me.
The king my father, sir, has drunk to you.
Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses;My mother gave it me.
Plantagenet.
But to be frank, and give it thee again.    And yet I wish but for the thing I have.    My bounty is as boundless as the sea,    My love as deep. The more I give to thee,    The more I have, for both are infinite.
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,    More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.    This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound;    This let alone will all the rest confound.
I am glad of this, for now I shall have reason    To show the love and duty that I bear you    With franker spirit.   Therefore, as I am bound,    Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.    Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio.    Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure.    I would not have your free and noble nature    Out of self-bounty be abused. Look to t.    I know our country disposition well.    In Venice they do let God see the pranks    They dare not show their husbands.   Their best conscience    Is not to leave t undone, but keept unknown.
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
Shes dead, deceased, shes dead. Alack the day!
Then sit we down, and let us all consult.My son and I will have the wind of you:Keep there: now talk at pleasure of your safety.
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself, And see how he will take it at your hands.
I never saw so huge a billow, sir,As toss'd it upon shore.
Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.    He bears him like a portly gentleman,    And, to say truth, Verona brags of him    To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.    I would not for the wealth of all the town    Here in my house do him disparagement.    Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.    It is my will, the which if thou respect,    Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,    An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
To the health of our general!
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
I brought my master news of Juliets death,    And then in post he came from Mantua    To this same place, to this same monument.    [Shows a letter]   This letter he early bid me give his father,    And threatened me with death, going in the vault,    If I departed not and left him there.
What news with you, sir?
I neither know it nor can learn of him.
Nay, you shall have no hat.  [Giving it to PERDITA]  Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
We thank your grace.
Nay, thats certain. They that dally nicely with words may quickly make them wanton.
Misprision in the highest degree!   Lady, Cucullus non facit monachum   thats as much to say as I wear not motley in my brain.   Good madonna, give me leave to proveyou a fool.
Say you?
Master, it is no time to chide you now.    Affection is not rated from the heart.    If love have touched you, naught remains but so:     Redime te captum quam queas minimo.
My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess,    Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her:    For I have heard my grandsire say full oft,    Extremity of griefs would make men mad;    And I have read that Hecuba of Troy    Ran mad through sorrow: that made me to fear;    Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt    Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,    And would not, but in fury, fright my youth:    Which made me down to throw my books, and fly    Causeless, perhaps. But pardon me, sweet aunt:    And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go,    I will most willingly attend your ladyship.
Who knows not that?
An unauthorized kiss!
I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this gentleman till my return.
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.
My lord, he doth deny to come.
No, not a grize. For tis a vulgar proofThat very oft we pity enemies.
In happy time here comes the duke himself.
You must amend your drunkenness.
[aside]  I see shes like to have neither cap nor gown.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      What, threat you me with telling of the king?    Tell him, and spare not.   Look, what I have said,    I will avouch t in presence of the king;    I dare adventure to be sent to th' Tower.    'Tis time to speak. My pains are quite forgot.
O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods    themselves have provided that I shall have much help    from you: how had you been my friends else?   why    have you that charitable title from thousands, did    not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told    more of you to myself than you can with modesty    speak in your own behalf; and thus far I confirm    you.   O you gods, think I, what need we have any    friends, if we should ne'er have need of 'em? they    were the most needless creatures living, should we    ne'er have use for 'em, and would most resemble    sweet instruments hung up in cases that keep their    sounds to themselves.   Why, I have often wished    myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you. We    are born to do benefits: and what better or    properer can we can our own than the riches of our    friends? O, what a precious comfort 'tis, to have    so many, like brothers, commanding one another's    fortunes!   O joy, e'en made away ere 't can be born!    Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks: to    forget their faults, I drink to you.
[waking]  The strangeness of your story putHeaviness in me.
We'll bear, with your lordship.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friendWhich you weep for.
O God, did Romeos hand shed Tybalts blood?
Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,    How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?    What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee    To make a second fall of cursed man?    Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?    Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,    Divine his downfall?   Say, where, when, and how,    Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad.    And his unbookish jealousy must construe    Poor Cassios smiles, gestures, and light behavior    Quite in the wrong.   How do you now, lieutenant?
[aside]  Sowter will cry upon t for all this, though it be as rank as a fox.
You have a daughter called Elizabeth, Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thouart as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
What if it should be so?
When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,    But for the sunset of my brothers son    It rains downright.    How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears,    Evermore showering? In one little body    Thou counterfeitst a bark, a sea, a wind,    For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,    Do ebb and flow with tears.   The bark thy body is,    Sailing in this salt flood. The winds thy sighs,    Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,    Without a sudden calm will overset    Thy tempest-tossèd body.   How now, wife?    Have you delivered to her our decree?
For what offence?
Marry, bachelor,    Her mother is the lady of the house,    And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.    I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.    I tell you, he that can lay hold of her    Shall have the chinks.
Biondello, what of that?
And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her.    A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful    I hope my master's suit will be but cold,    Since she respects my mistress' love so much.    Alas, how love can trifle with itself!    Here is her picture: let me see; I think,    If I had such a tire, this face of mine    Were full as lovely as is this of hers:    And yet the painter flatter'd her a little,    Unless I flatter with myself too much.    Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow:    If that be all the difference in his love,    I'll get me such a colour'd periwig.    Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine:    Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.    What should it be that he respects in her    But I can make respective in myself,    If this fond Love were not a blinded god?    Come, shadow, come and take this shadow up,    For 'tis thy rival. O thou senseless form,    Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, loved and adored!    And, were there sense in his idolatry,    My substance should be statue in thy stead.    I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,    That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow,    I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes    To make my master out of love with thee!
Come, come, Ill go burn some sack. 'Tis too late to goto bed now. Come, knight. Come, knight.
Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here,    This is the mouth o' th' cell. No noise, and enter.    Do that good mischief which may make this island    Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban,    For aye thy foot-licker.
Monday, my lord.
Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.
Therefore he will be, Timon:His honesty rewards him in itself;It must not bear my daughter.
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;    And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,    As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.    Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,    Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:    Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,    The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
I never saw a better-fashioned gown,More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
If thou dost slander her and torture me,    Never pray more. Abandon all remorse.    On horrors head horrors accumulate,    Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed,    For nothing canst thou to damnation add    Greater than that.
Oh, grace! Oh, heaven forgive me!    Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?    God buy you, take mine office. O wretched fool    That lovst to make thine honesty a vice!    O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,    To be direct and honest is not safe.    I thank you for this profit, and from hence    Ill love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.
[within]  Theres wood enough within.
My worthy friends, will you draw near?
Beseech your honourTo make it known to us.
So it is said, my noble lord; but thereforeCame not my friend nor I.
Where's the fool now?
Truly, an obedient lady.I do beseech your lordship, call her back.
Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury?
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,    how it takes up the shore! but that's not the    point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!    sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the    ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon    swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a    cork into a hogshead.   And then for the    land-service, to see how the bear tore out his    shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said    his name was Antigonus, a nobleman.   But to make an    end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned    it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the    sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared    and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than    the sea or weather.
[to STEPHANO]    I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow.    And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts,    Show thee a jays nest, and instruct thee how    To snare the nimble marmoset.   Ill bring thee    To clustering filberts, and sometimes Ill get thee    Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?
Nor I.
Why then tis hers, my lord, and, being hers,She may, I think, bestow t on any man.
Yes, my lord. More jewels yet!There is no crossing him in 's humour;
Lords, you that here are under our arrest,    Procure your sureties for your days of answer.    Little are we beholding to your love,    And little look'd for at your helping hands.
Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.
We have none such, sir.
Well; what further?
Pray you, put up your dagger and put out your wit.
Why, no. The day had broke    Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,    To send in to your wife.   My suit to her    Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona    Procure me some access.
Adieu, sir.
The commons will not then be satisfied.
How now, my lords!
That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates,    To foster it, nor ever to preserve.    She died at night; I'll say so. Who can cross it?    Unless you play the pious innocent,    And for an honest attribute cry out    'She died by foul play.'
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,    If he appeal the duke on ancient malice;    Or worthily, as a good subject should,    On some known ground of treachery in him?
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder.    His Lordship knows me well, and loves me well.    My lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn    I saw good strawberries in your garden there;    I do beseech you, send for some of them.
[reads]   Fare thee well, and God have mercy upon one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thyself.   Thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy,    Andrew Aguecheek    If this letter move him not, his legs cannot. Ill givet him.
My lords, then, under favour, pardon me,    If I speak like a captain.    Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,    And not endure all threats?   sleep upon't,    And let the foes quietly cut their throats,    Without repugnancy? If there be    Such valour in the bearing, what make we    Abroad? why then, women are more valiant    That stay at home,   if bearing carry it,    And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon    Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,    If wisdom be in suffering.   O my lords,    As you are great, be pitifully good:    Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?    To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust;    But, in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.    To be in anger is impiety;    But who is man that is not angry?    Weigh but the crime with this.
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
Two things are to be done:    My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress.    Ill set her on.    Myself, the while, to draw the Moor apart    And bring him jump when he may Cassio find    Soliciting his wife. Ay, thats the way.    Dull not device by coldness and delay.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Faith, so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating and drinking.
[Aside]  What from Antioch?
I cannot speak, nor think    Nor dare to know that which I know.   O sir!    You have undone a man of fourscore three,    That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,    To die upon the bed my father died,    To lie close by his honest bones:   but now    Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me    Where no priest shovels in dust.   O cursed wretch,    That knew'st this was the prince,    and wouldst adventure    To mingle faith with him!   Undone! undone!    If I might die within this hour, I have lived    To die when I desire.
Oh, sir, Lucentio slipped me like his greyhound,Which runs himself and catches for his master.
You kiss by th book.
There is a fair behavior in thee, captain,    And though that nature with a beauteous wall    Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee    I will believe thou hast a mind that suits    With this thy fair and outward character.    I pritheeand Ill pay thee bounteously    Conceal me what I am, and be my aid    For such disguise as haply shall become    The form of my intent   . Ill serve this duke.    Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him.    It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing    And speak to him in many sorts of music    That will allow me very worth his service.    What else may hap to time I will commit.    Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
Yes.
No man but prophesied revenge for it.
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment:    Ill strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,    Lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow,    When I should mount with wings of victory.    Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.
My lord?
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders    To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me,    And that he does I weep.   Myself am Naples,    Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld    The king my father wracked.
And cross-gartered?
Groan! Why, no. But sadly, tell me who.
Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved mylord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king,    I was a packhorse in his great affairs,    A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,    A liberal rewarder of his friends.    To royalize his blood, I spent mine own.
We would so, and then go a-batfowling.
Ay, sir.
For her, my lord,I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotlessI' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,In this which you accuse her.
Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
The good gods preserve you!
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
How dost, fool?
One seven-night longer.
[aside to  TRANIO  ]  But in the others silence do I seeMaids mild behavior and sobriety.Peace, Tranio.
Oh, villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since I could distinguish betwixta benefit and an injury I never found man that knew howto love himself.   Ere I would say I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I would change my humanitywith a baboon.
Who is my principal?
As much to you, good sister. Whither away?
Beast!
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,    If I have any grace or power to move you    His present reconciliation take.    For if he be not one that truly loves you,    That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,    I have no judgment in an honest face.    I prithee, call him back.
To the Elephant.
Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar.  [he looks in an almanac]  Who saw the sun today?
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.
But saying oer what I have said before.    My child is yet a stranger in the world.    She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.    Let two more summers wither in their pride    Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Even so. How think you of it?
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
Then heavenHave mercy on me!
Ay.
That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
He called her whore. A beggar in his drink Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them. Gentlemen, good een. A word with one of you.
And mine, two hundred.    But though they jump not on a just account    As in these cases, where the aim reports    'Tis oft with differenceyet do they all confirm    A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
Banish us both and send the king with me.
I'll keep you company.
[looking at VIOLA]   Do I stand there? I never had a brother;    Nor can there be that deity in my nature,    Of here and everywhere.   I had a sister,    Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured.    Of charity, what kin are you to me?    What countryman? What name? What parentage?
I could not stay behind you. My desire,    More sharp than filèd steel, did spur me forth.    And not all love to see you, though so much    As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,    But jealousy what might befall your travel,    Being skilless in these parts, which to a stranger,    Unguided and unfriended, often prove    Rough and unhospitable.   My willing love,    The rather by these arguments of fear,    Set forth in your pursuit.
They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.Creditors? devils!
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow;    points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can    learnedly handle,   though they come to him by the    gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns:   why, he    sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you    would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants    to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.
He is much changed.
Ho! who is within there?
May not one speak?
No, no. But all this did I know before.What says he of our marriage? What of that?
[Aside]  Though I am not naturally honest, I am sosometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.   [Taking off his false beard]  How now, rustics! whither are you bound?
Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?
The date is out of such prolixity.    Well have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,    Bearing a Tartars painted bow of lath,    Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,    Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke    After the prompter for our entrance.    But let them measure us by what they will.    Well measure them a measure and be gone.
Ay, defiled land, my lord.
My noble lord
Ay, but, lady,    That policy may either last so long,    Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,    Or breed itself so out of circumstances,    That, I being absent and my place supplied,    My general will forget my love and service.
So are we all.
Why, wherefore ask you this?
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
My voice is now the kings, my looks mine own.
The better for the King of heaven that hath him.
I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath    Prevail not, go and see:   if you can bring    Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,    Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you    As I would do the gods.   But, O thou tyrant!    Do not repent these things, for they are heavier    Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee    To nothing but despair.   A thousand knees    Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,    Upon a barren mountain and still winter    In storm perpetual, could not move the gods    To look that way thou wert.
The heads of the maids?
Beseech you
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulkedand bitumed ready.
O sweet Paulina,Make me to think so twenty years together!No settled senses of the world can matchThe pleasure of that madness. Let't alone.
Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.
Woe the while!O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,Break too.
Well done, my lord.
I stretch it out for that word broad, which, added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight. Since the youthof the counts was today with thy lady, she is much outof quiet.   For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone with him.If I do not gull him into a nayword and make him a common recreation, do not think I have wit enough to liestraight in my bed.   I know I can do it.
Ay, on mine honor.
My lord,
I am woe for t, sir.
Methinks his words do from such passion fly,    That he believes himself. So do not I.    Prove true, imagination, oh, prove true,    That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
Who is that calls so coldly?
We are for law: he dies; urge it no more,On height of our displeasure: friend or brother,He forfeits his own blood that spills another.
Who calls?
So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
Thou hast prevail'd; I pardon them and thee:    Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts.    Come, let us go: we will include all jars    With triumphs, mirth and rare solemnity.
[as CAMBIO]  I read that I profess,  The Art to Love.
I grant you.
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;Look to thy bark: I'll not be long beforeI call upon thee.
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
A thousand pieces.
Why, go to then.    She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,    To seel her fathers eyes up close as oak,    He thought twas witchcraft.   But I am much to blame.    I humbly do beseech you of your pardon    For too much loving you.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse.    For I mine own gained knowledge should profane    If I would time expend with such a snipe    But for my sport and profit.   I hate the Moor,    And it is thought abroad that twixt my sheets    He has done my office. I know not if t be true,    But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,    Will do as if for surety.   He holds me well.    The better shall my purpose work on him.    Cassios a proper man. Let me see now,    To get his place and to plume up my will    In double knavery. How? How? Lets see.    After some time, to abuse Othellos ear    That he is too familiar with his wife.    He hath a person and a smooth dispose    To be suspected, framed to make women false.    The Moor is of a free and open nature    That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,    And will as tenderly be led by th' nose    As asses are.    I have t. It is engendered! Hell and night    Must bring this monstrous birth to the worlds light.
You might do much.What is your parentage?
(  aside  ) O, ay, make up that.He is now at a cold scent.
What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.
Come, let us to the castle.    News, friends! Our wars are done, the Turks are drowned.    How does my old acquaintance of this isle?    Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus,    I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,    I prattle out of fashion, and I dote    In mine own comforts.   I prithee, good Iago,    Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.    Bring thou the master to the citadel.    He is a good one, and his worthiness    Does challenge much respect.   Come, Desdemona,    Once more, well met at Cyprus.
He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!    The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,    And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.    Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;    Bid her send me presently a thousand pound:    Hold, take my ring.
Even when you please, since you will have it so.
I will hear further reason for this.
Methinks I do.
Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord;requesting your lordship to supply his instant usewith so many talents.
(  aside  ) This wins him, liver and all.
[as LUCENTIO]  He is my father, sir, and sooth to say,In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
He shall be none;We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?
My gracious lord,    I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;    In every one of these no man is free,    But that his negligence, his folly, fear,    Among the infinite doings of the world,    Sometime puts forth.   In your affairs, my lord,    If ever I were wilful-negligent,    It was my folly; if industriously    I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,    Not weighing well the end;     if ever fearful    To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,    Where of the execution did cry out    Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear    Which oft infects the wisest:   these, my lord,    Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty    Is never free of.   But, beseech your grace,    Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass    By its own visage: if I then deny it,    'Tis none of mine.
Good morrow, neighbor Gremio.God save you, gentlemen!
All hail, great master! Grave sir, hail! I come    To answer thy best pleasure, be t to fly,    To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride    On the curled clouds. To thy strong bidding, task    Ariel and all his quality.
And may not young men die as well as old?
He is wise,And, on my life, hath stoln him home to bed.
O most insatiate and luxurious woman!
At sea! what mother?
Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we pay for    them.   If there be not a conscience to be used in    every trade, we shall never prosper.
Yet had we not determined he should die    Until your Lordship came to see his end    (Which now the loving haste of these our friends,    Something against our meaning, have prevented),    Because, my lord, I would have had you heard    The traitor speak, and timorously confess    The manner and the purpose of his treasons,    That you might well have signified the same    Unto the citizens, who haply may    Misconstrue us in him, and wail his death.
She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickensas you are. Would we could see you at Corinth!
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
Are you wise?
Art thou afeard?
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
O no, my reasons are too deep and deadToo deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
Ill attend her here    And woo her with some spirit when she comes.    Say that she rail; why then Ill tell her plain    She sings as sweetly as a nightingale.    Say that she frown; Ill say she looks as clear    As morning roses newly washed with dew.    Say she be mute and will not speak a word;    Then Ill commend her volubility,    And say she uttereth piercing eloquence.    If she do bid me pack, Ill give her thanks,    As though she bid me stay by her a week.    If she deny to wed, Ill crave the day    When I shall ask the banns and when be marrièd.    But here she comesand now, Petruchio, speak.
Pretty too.What say you, James Soundpost?
Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.
Who does infect her?
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
Heaven doth truly know it.
For honour's cause, forbear your suffrages:    If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.    Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,    Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease.    A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you to    Forbear the absence of your king:    If in which time expired, he not return,    I shall with aged patience bear your yoke.    But if I cannot win you to this love,    Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,    And in your search spend your adventurous worth;    Whom if you find, and win unto return,    You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.
He thanks your grace; names himself Pericles,    A gentleman of Tyre,    Who only by misfortune of the seas    Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.
'Tis well that thou hast causeBut thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.
I did not give the lie. Out o' your wits and hearing too? A pox o' your bottle! This can sack and drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers!
Your honour knows what 'tis to say well enough.
O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman    Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not    Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd:    Thou art not ignorant what dear good will    I bear unto the banish'd Valentine,    Nor how my father would enforce me marry    Vain Turio, whom my very soul abhors.    Thyself hast loved; and I have heard thee say    No grief did ever come so near thy heart    As when thy lady and thy true love died,    Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity.    Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,    To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode;    And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,    I do desire thy worthy company,    Upon whose faith and honour I repose.    Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,    But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,    And on the justice of my flying hence,    To keep me from a most unholy match,    Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.    I do desire thee, even from a heart    As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,    To bear me company and go with me:    If not, to hide what I have said to thee,    That I may venture to depart alone.
In sooth, you are to blame.
Ha! I like not that.
With naught but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means. The jewels you have had from me to deliver Desdemona would half have corrupted a votaress.   You havetold me she hath received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I find none.
A right good markman! And shes fair I love.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,But the true ground of all these piteous woesWe cannot without circumstance descry.
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
As many vouched rarities are.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,    The letter was not nice but full of charge,    Of dear import, and the neglecting it    May do much danger.   Friar John, go hence.    Get me an iron crow and bring it straight    Unto my cell.
Madam wife, they say that I have dreamedAnd slept above some fifteen year or more.
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well:   he    hath been since an ape-bearer; then a    process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a    motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's    wife within a mile where my land and living lies;    and, having flown over many knavish professions, he    settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.
Stand all apart,And show fair duty to his majesty.
Spoke like an officer! Ha' to thee, lad!
Oh, beware, my lord, of jealousy!    It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock    The meat it feeds on.   That cuckold lives in bliss    Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger,    But, oh, what damnèd minutes tells he o'er    Who dotes, yet doubts suspects, yet soundly loves!
My lord? my lord?
Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself, for what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve.   Butthis is from my commission. I will on with my speech inyour praise and then show you the heart of my message.
A lunatic lean-witted fool,    Presuming on an ague's privilege,    Darest with thy frozen admonition    Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood    With fury from his native residence.    Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,    Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,    This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head    Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
What is t? A spirit?    Lord, how it looks about!   Believe me, sir,    It carries a brave form. But tis a spirit.
Look how he laughs already!
'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,Whom I would imitate: consumption catch thee!
Fool!
I do beseech your majesty, impute his words    To wayward sickliness and age in him:    He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear    As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.
So glad of this as they I cannot be,    Who are surprised withal. But my rejoicing    At nothing can be more.   Ill to my book,    For yet ere supper-time must I perform    Much business appertaining.
Take that, and that.  [stabs CLARENCE]  If all this will not do,Ill drown you in the malmsey butt within.
Most welcome, sir!
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possibleThat love should of a sudden take such hold?
Nay, my troth, I know not. But I know to be up late is to be up late.
Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
What is pourquoi? Do, or not do?   I would I had bestowed that time in the tongues that I have in fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting. O, had I but followed the arts!
You wrong me, Signior Gremio. Give me leave.    I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,    That hearing of her beauty and her wit,    Her affability and bashful modesty,    Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,    Am bold to show myself a forward guest    Within your house, to make mine eye the witness    Of that report which I so oft have heard.    And, for an entrance to my entertainment,    I do present you with a man of mine,    [presenting  HORTENSIO  , disguised as  LITIO  ]    Cunning in music and the mathematics,    To instruct her fully in those sciences,    Whereof I know she is not ignorant.    Accept of him, or else you do me wrong.    His name is Litio, born in Mantua.
But shall I live in hope?
Had our prince,Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'dWell with this lord: there was not full a monthBetween their births.
I go; and towards three or four o'clock Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
So is mine. Do you hear, monster? If I should take a displeasure against you, look you
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year oldI bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird!God forbid! Wheres this girl? What, Juliet!
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia.    I cannot weep, nor answers have I none,    But what should go by water.   Prithee, tonight    Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember,    And call thy husband hither.
If it be that, or any that was hers,It speaks against her with the other proofs.
Ay me!
O woeful time.
It fits when such a villain is a guest. Ill not endure him.
It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.
By this we gatherYou have tripp'd since.
I am sorry for't:    All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,    I do repent.   Alas! I have show'd too much    The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd    To the noble heart.   What's gone and what's past help    Should be past grief: do not receive affliction    At my petition;   I beseech you, rather    Let me be punish'd, that have minded you    Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege    Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:    The love I bore your queenlo, fool again!    I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;    I'll not remember you of my own lord,    Who is lost too: take your patience to you,    And I'll say nothing.
Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep!What dost thou wrap and fumble in thine arms?
Good Paulina,    Who hast the memory of Hermione,    I know, in honour,   O, that ever I    Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,    I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,    Have taken treasure from her lips
Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.
To whom in all this presence speaks your Grace?
A devil, a born devil on whose nature    Nurture can never stick, on whom my pains,    Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost.    And as with age his body uglier grows,    So his mind cankers. I will plague them all,    Even to roaring.
I say amen.
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long    Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?    Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment    Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,    Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke    About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,    Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,    Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.    I am the last of noble Edward's sons,    Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first:    In war was never lion raged more fierce,    In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,    Than was that young and princely gentleman.    His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,    Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;    But when he frown'd, it was against the French    And not against his friends;   his noble hand    Did will what he did spend and spent not that    Which his triumphant father's hand had won  ;  His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,    But bloody with the enemies of his kin.    O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,    Or else he never would compare between.
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.    When have I injured thee? When done thee wrong?    Or thee?Or thee? Or any of your faction?    A plague upon you all! His royal grace,    Whom God preserve better than you would wish,    Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while    But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
Yes.
It gives me wonder great as my content    To see you here before me. Oh, my souls joy!    If after every tempest come such calms,    May the winds blow till they have wakened death,    And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas    Olympus-high, and duck again as low    As hells from heaven!   If it were now to die,    'Twere now to be most happy, for I fear    My soul hath her content so absolute    That not another comfort like to this    Succeeds in unknown fate.
[aside]  Why, so this gallant will command the sun.
And your reports have set the murder on.
[to LANCE]  How now, you whoreson peasant!Where have you been these two days loitering?
Arm, arm, my lord;Rome never had more cause.    The Goths have gather'd head; and with a power    high-resolved men, bent to the spoil,    They hither march amain,   under conduct    Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus;    Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do    As much as ever Coriolanus did.
I do defy thy comminationAnd apprehend thee for a felon here.
Give us some gold, good Timon: hast thou more?
Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in s tale, by this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.
You that way and you this, but two in company;    Each man apart, all single and alone,    Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.    If where thou art two villains shall not be,    Come not near him.   If thou wouldst not reside    But where one villain is, then him abandon.    Hence, pack! there's gold; you came for gold, ye slaves:
Our late noble master!
What, didst thou offer her this from me?
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,Fatal and ominous to noble peers! Within the guilty closure of thy walls,Richard the Second here was hacked to death,And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes;    You must eat men.   Yet thanks I must you con    That you are thieves profess'd, that you work not    In holier shapes: for there is boundless theft    In limited professions.   Rascal thieves,    Here's gold. Go, suck the subtle blood o' the grape,    Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,    And so 'scape hanging: trust not the physician;    His antidotes are poison, and he slays    Moe than you rob:   take wealth and lives together;    Do villany, do, since you protest to do't,    Like workmen. I'll example you with thievery.    The sun's a thief, and with his great attraction    Robs the vast sea: the moon's an arrant thief,    And her pale fire she snatches from the sun:    The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves    The moon into salt tears: the earth's a thief,    That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen    From general excrement   :   each thing's a thief:    The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power    Have uncheque'd theft. Love not yourselves: away,    Rob one another. There's more gold.   Cut throats:    All that you meet are thieves: to Athens go,    Break open shops; nothing can you steal,    But thieves do lose it: steal no less for this    I give you; and gold confound you howsoe'er! Amen.
Good madam, let me see your face.
Would youd pardon me;    I do not without danger walk these streets:    Once in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys    I did some service, of such note indeed,    That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answered.
Is dead.
Flavius.
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
[aside]    The deep-revolving witty Buckingham    No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels    Hath he so long held out with me, untired,    And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
[aside]  O, peace! And the spirit of humors intimate reading aloud to him!
Put off that gown, Trinculo. By this hand, Ill have that gown.
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.Would none but I might venge my cousins death!
Whats a drunken man like, fool?
I will be mild and gentle in my words.
I have, my liege.
Thy case, dear friend,    Shall be my precedent. As thou gotst Milan,    Ill come by Naples. Draw thy sword.   One stroke    Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest.    And I the king shall love thee.
Ha! Wherefore?
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league With thy embracements to my wifes alliesAnd make me happy in your unity.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,    From off the battlements of yonder tower;    Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk    Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;    Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,    Oercovered quite with dead mens rattling bones,    With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;    Or bid me go into a new-made grave    And hide me with a dead man in his shroud    Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble    And I will do it without fear or doubt,    To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.
Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,I am as poor as you.
Nay, but hear me.
With him? Why, tis not possible.
Ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hathdanced before the king; and not the worst of thethree but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.
How now, my lord?I have been talking with a suitor here,A man that languishes in your displeasure.
Now, Lychorida!
Indeed shes a most fresh and delicate creature.
I am a feather for each wind that blows:    Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel    And call me father?   better burn it now    Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.    It shall not neither.   You, sir, come you hither;    You that have been so tenderly officious    With Lady Margery, your midwife there,    To save this bastard's life,for 'tis a bastard,    So sure as this beard's grey,    what will you adventure    To save this brat's life?
Would it be better, madam, than I am? I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
Hark, hark, you gods!
It is in vain; he will not speak to you.
Gramercy, lovely Lucius: what's the news?
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.    Your plainness and your shortness please me well.    Right true it is your son Lucentio here    Doth love my daughter and she loveth him,    Or both dissemble deeply their affections.    And therefore, if you say no more than this,    That like a father you will deal with him    And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,    The match is made, and all is done.    Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
But well, when I discourse of love and peace?
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:When you cast out, it still came home.
Read the indictment.
I know not.
Gracious my lord,    You know your father's temper:   at this time    He will allow no speech, which I do guess    You do not purpose to him; and as hardly    Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:    Then, till the fury of his highness settle,    Come not before him.
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.
Thats more to me than my wetting. Yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.
Why, how now, daughter Katherine? In your dumps?
[Aside]   She speaks.    O, speak again, bright angel! For thou art    As glorious to this night, being oer my head,    As is a wingèd messenger of heaven    Unto the white, upturnèd, wondering eyes    Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him    When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds    And sails upon the bosom of the air.
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose    You should enjoy were you this countrys king,    As little joy may you suppose in me    That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.
And so in me, and so, I think, in all.    Yet since it is but green, it should be put    To no apparent likelihood of breach,    Which haply by much company might be urged.    Therefore I say with noble Buckingham    That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
I warrant you, madam.
Come, well have him in a dark room and bound. My nieceis already in the belief that hes mad.   We may carry itthus, for our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy onhim,   at which time we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of madmen. But see, but see!
How doth the prince?
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark    By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped.    Hes almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his    son's pranks too;   who, I may say, is no honest man,    neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make    me the king's brother-in-law.
(sings) She loves anotherWho calls, ha?
O, stop there a little!     [Aside]     This is the rarest dream that e'er dull sleep    Did mock sad fools withal: this cannot be:    My daughter's buried.   Well: where were you bred?    I'll hear you more, to the bottom of your story,    And never interrupt you.
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me, It were a grief so brief to part with thee. Farewell.
Apprehend    Nothing but jollity.   The gods themselves,    Humbling their deities to love, have taken    The shapes of beasts upon them:   Jupiter    Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune    A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,    Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,    As I seem now.   Their transformations    Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,    Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires    Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts    Burn hotter than my faith.
This is in thee a nature but infected;    A poor unmanly melancholy sprung    From change of fortune.   Why this spade? this place?    This slave-like habit? and these looks of care?    Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft;    Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot    That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods,    By putting on the cunning of a carper.    Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive    By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee,    And let his very breath, whom thou'lt observe,    Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,    And call it excellent:   thou wast told thus;    Thou gavest thine ears like tapsters that bid welcome    To knaves and all approachers: 'tis most just    That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again,    Rascals should have 't. Do not assume my likeness.
Some devil whisper curses in mine ear,And prompt me, that my tongue may utter forthThe venomous malice of my swelling heart!
If this were played upon a stage now, I could condemn it as an improbable fiction.
Ay, marry, are they, sir.
[within]  Ding-dong.
Sebastian are you?
He seems to be of great authority:   close with him,    give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn    bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show    the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,    and no more ado.   Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'
Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide frommy shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire, good Curtis.
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
Rogue, rogue, rogue!    I am sick of this false world, and will love nought    But even the mere necessities upon 't.    Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave;    Lie where the light foam the sea may beat    Thy grave-stone daily:   make thine epitaph,    That death in me at others' lives may laugh.
I do remember.
I was, but I do find more pain in banishment    Than death can yield me here by my abode.    A husband and a son thou owst to me;     [to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     And thou a kingdom;    all of you, allegiance.    The sorrow that I have by right is yours,    And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
How, Camillo,May this, almost a miracle, be done?That I may call thee something more than manAnd after that trust to thee.
At your request! Yes, nightingales answer daws!
It is the quality o' th' climate.
Heaven restore thee!
Tomorrow will it please you to be crowned?
Go on before. Ill talk with this good fellow.
My liege, one word.
Pardon me, Bianca,    I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed,    But I shall, in a more continuate time,    Strike off this score of absence.   Sweet Bianca,     (giving her DESDEMONAs handkerchief)     Take me this work out.
That shall you know hereafter.
Where art thou, keeper? Give me a cup of wine.
O, 'tis a worthy lord.
[To HORTENSIO]   I pray you, sir, let him go while the humor lasts.   O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding would do little good upon him.   She may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so.Why, thats nothing;   an he begin once, hell rail in his rope tricks.   Ill tell you what sir: an she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face andso disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.   You know him not, sir.
Ill help you, Sir Toby, because well be dressed together.
And left themMore rich for what they yielded.
Good aunt, stand up.
Lucius!What, do we meet together?
An honor! Were not I thine only nurse, I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.
Lead off this ground, and lets make further searchFor my poor son.
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady.Lord, Lord! when twas a little prating thing.Oh, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard,   but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer man.   But, Ill warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin bothwith a letter?
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though    I have for the most part been aired abroad, I    desire to lay my bones there.   Besides, the penitent    king, my master, hath sent for me;   to whose feeling    sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to    think so, which is another spur to my departure.
Then I will give you the serving creature.
(  aside  ) That youths a rare courtier. Rain odors. Well.
Death may usurp on nature many hours,    And yet the fire of life kindle again    The o'erpress'd spirits.   I heard of an Egyptian    That had nine hours lien dead,    Who was by good appliance recovered.
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.    Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so    That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,    If heaven will take the present at our hands.    But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?
Bid her devise    Some means to come to shrift this afternoon.    And there she shall at Friar Lawrence cell    Be shrived and married.   [Gives her coins]   Here is for thy pains.
Thou know'st I have powerTo take thy life from thee.
O excellent device and make a sop of him.
And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.
Were never orphans had so dear a loss.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas!
Where wouldst thou send it?
Send for the county. Go tell him of this.Ill have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,    To stay him from the fall of vanity;    And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,    True ornaments to know a holy man.    Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,    Lend favorable ears to our requests,    And pardon us the interruption    Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
God bless thee, lady!
Fearst thou that, Antonio?
Come, let us leave her;And the gods make her prosperous!
Grandam, his nurse.
If the event o' the journeyProve as successful to the queen,O be't so!As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,The time is worth the use on't.
Please your lordship, here is the wine.
This is the prettiest low-born lass that everRan on the green-sward: nothing she does or seemsBut smacks of something greater than herself,Too noble for this place.
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
So just is God to right the innocent.
Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer.     (to VIOLA)    Your master quits you, and for your service done him,    So much against the mettle of your sex,    So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,    And since you called me master for so long,    Here is my hand.   You shall from this time be    Your masters mistress.
How now! What news from her?
'Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their capsat their money: these debts may well be calleddesperate ones, for a madman owes 'em.
Crying O dear Cassio! as it were. His gesture importsit.
I go. An if you plead as well for themAs I can say nay to thee for myself,No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
Ill do my best    To woo your lady   [aside]   Yet, a barful strife    Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.
What, would you make me mad?   Am not I Christopher Sly, old Slys son of Burton Heath, by birth a peddler, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker?   Ask Marian Hacket, the fat alewife of Wincot, if she know me not! If she say I am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lyingst knave in Christendom.   What!I am not bestraught! Heres
Now the gods keep you old enough; that you may live    Only in bone, that none may look on you!    I'm worse than mad:   I have kept back their foes,    While they have told their money and let out    Their coin upon large interest, I myself    Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?    Is this the balsam that the usuring senate    Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment!    It comes not ill; I hate not to be banish'd;    It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,    That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up    My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.    'Tis honour with most lands to be at odds;    Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort.
To prison, till fit timeOf law and course of direct sessionCall thee to answer.
But how camest thou by this ring? At my departI gave this unto Julia.
No, if without more words you will get you hence.
This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod,    And there is in this business more than nature    Was ever conduct of.   Some oracle    Must rectify our knowledge.
[as LUCENTIO]   To save your life in this extremity,    This favor will I do you for his sake    And think it not the worst of all your fortunes    That you are like to Sir Vincentio    His name and credit shall you undertake,    And in my house you shall be friendly lodged.    Look that you take upon you as you should.    You understand me, sir.   So shall you stay    Till you have done your business in the city.    If this be courtsy, sir, accept of it.
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
A match! 'Tis done.
I found it in my chamber,    And he himself confessed but even now    That there he dropped it for a special purpose    Which wrought to his desire.
And so doth mine. I muse why shes at liberty.
(to IAGO)    Disprove this villain, if thou best a man.    He says thou toldst him that his wife was false.    I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain.    Speak, for my heart is full.
We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth,From whence we had our being and our birth.
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me morethan the stripes I have received, which are mightyones and millions.
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown, But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the emperorwith a grace?
I will, sir.
Well, as you guess?
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio, I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrences cell.    There stays a husband to make you a wife.    Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks.    Theyll be in scarlet straight at any news.    Hie you to church.   I must another way    To fetch a ladder, by the which your love    Must climb a birds nest soon when it is dark.    I am the drudge and toil in your delight,    But you shall bear the burden soon at night.    Go. Ill to dinner. Hie you to the cell.
I take thee at thy word. Call me but love, and Ill be new baptized.Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel fathers he! But art thou not advised, he took some careTo get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
If you be she, I do entreat your patienceTo hear me speak the message I am sent on.
And what'sThe sixth and last, the which the knight himselfWith such a graceful courtesy deliver'd?
Madam, you have done me wrong,Notorious wrong.
(  aside  ) Bolts and shackles!
My lord, you know I love you.
Shes like a liar gone to burning hell.'Twas I that killed her.
Why, he shall never wake until the great Judgment Day.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if youhad not taken yourself with the manner.
So they do nothing, tis a venial slip. But if I give my wife a handkerchief
Sir?
They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,    That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot    Do what they would; are sorryyou are honourable,    But yet they could have wish'dthey know not    Something hath been amiss   a noble nature    May catch a wrenchwould all were well'tis pity;    And so, intending other serious matters,    After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,    With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods    They froze me into silence.
Is't possible the world should so much differ,And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,To him that worships thee!
And in good time here comes the sweating lord.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Dear my brother,Let him that was the cause of this have powerTo take off so much grief from you as heWill piece up in himself.
What make you from home? How is t with you, my most fair Bianca?Indeed, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
All things is ready. How near is our master?
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,Tell them there I have gold; look, so I have.
If she be false, heaven mocked itself.Ill not believe t.
The gods defend me!
Not I, believe me. Thus Ill visit her.
Thither, gentle mariner.Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?
Touched you the bastardy of Edwards children?
[as LUCENTIO]  How now, whats the matter?
By my troth, Ill tell thee, I am almost sick for one,  (aside]  though I would not have it grow on my chin.  [To fool]  Is thy lady within?
That would I learn of you,As one being best acquainted with her humor.
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting    Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.    I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall    Now seeming sweet, convert to bitterest gall.
Marry, sir, tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
What money, sir?    For the fair kindness you have showed me here,    And part being prompted by your present trouble,    Out of my lean and low ability    Ill lend you something.   My having is not much.    Ill make division of my present with you.    Hold, theres half my coffer.    (offering him money)
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have nolying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and theyoften give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them forit with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; thereforethey do not give us the lie.
The moon? The sun! It is not moonlight now.
Then patiently hear my impatience.
What noise is this?Not dead? Not yet quite dead?    I that am cruel am yet merciful,    I would not have thee linger in thy pain.    So, so.
He says so, Tranio?
Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.
What, so brief?
I cannot be offended with my trade. Please you to name it.
Earths increase, foison plenty,    Barns and garners never empty,    Vines and clustering bunches growing,    Plants with goodly burden bowing    Spring come to you at the farthest    In the very end of harvest.    Scarcity and want shall shun you.    Ceres' blessing so is on you.
Villain, thou knowst not law of God nor man.No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me. I think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.
Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
I will dispatch you severally; you to Lord Lucius;    to Lord Lucullus you: I hunted with his honour    to-day: you, to Sempronius:   commend me to their    loves, and, I am proud, say, that my occasions have    found time to use 'em toward a supply of money: let    the request be fifty talents.
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother.Then bring me to their sights. Ill bear thy blame And take thy office from thee, on my peril.
And for that offense    Immediately we do exile him hence.    I have an interest in your hate's proceeding;    My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.    But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine    That you shall all repent the loss of mine.    I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.    Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.    Therefore use none.   Let Romeo hence in haste,    Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.   Bear hence this body, and attend our will.  Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,    Further to question me of your king's departure:    His seal'd commission, left in trust with me,    Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel.
I thank you, sir.
Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail    Of any point in't shall not only be    Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,    Whom for this time we pardon.   We enjoin thee,    As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry    This female bastard hence and that thou bear it    To some remote and desert place quite out    Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,    Without more mercy, to its own protection    And favour of the climate.   As by strange fortune    It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,    On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,    That thou commend it strangely to some place    Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
My true Paulina,We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
So is the dearest o' th' loss.
I, that I am one now:    Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,    I'ld give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.    That the whole life of Athens were in this!    Thus would I eat it.
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.
Wherefore did they notThat hour destroy us?
'Faith, by no means; she has so strictly tied    Her to her chamber, that 'tis impossible.    One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery;    This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd    And on her virgin honour will not break it.
And, Norfolk, throw down his.
What means the nun? she dies! help, gentlemen!
This days black fate on more days doth depend.This but begins the woe others must end.
But I much marvel that your lordship, having    Rich tire about you, should at these early hours    Shake off the golden slumber of repose.    'Tis most strange,    Nature should be so conversant with pain,    Being thereto not compell'd.
Nay, that's most fix'd.
Strike on the tinder, ho!    Give me a taper, call up all my people!    This accident is not unlike my dream,    Belief of it oppresses me already.    Light, I say, light!
Go to Ventidius.
Men should be what they seem,Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
She is the fairies midwife, and she comes    In shape no bigger than an agate stone    On the forefinger of an alderman,    Drawn with a team of little atomi    Over mens noses as they lie asleep.    Her wagon spokes made of long spinners legs,    The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,    Her traces of the smallest spiders web,    Her collars of the moonshines watery beams,    Her whip of crickets bone, the lash of film,    Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat,    Not half so big as a round little worm    Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.    Her chariot is an empty hazelnut    Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,    Time out o mind the fairies coachmakers.    And in this state she gallops night by night    Through lovers brains, and then they dream of love;    On courtiers knees, that dream on curtsies straight;    Oer lawyers fingers, who straight dream on fees;    Oer ladies lips, who straight on kisses dream,    Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,    Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.    Sometime she gallops oer a courtiers nose,    And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.    And sometime comes she with a tithe-pigs tail    Tickling a parsons nose as he lies asleep,    Then he dreams of another benefice.    Sometime she driveth oer a soldiers neck,    And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,    Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,    Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon    Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,    And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two    And sleeps again.   This is that very Mab    That plaits the manes of horses in the night    And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,    Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes.    This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,    That presses them and learns them first to bear,    Making them women of good carriage.    This is she
More than mistress of    Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not    At all acknowledge.   For Polixenes,    With whom I am accused, I do confess    I loved him as in honour he required,    With such a kind of love as might become    A lady like me, with a love even such,    So and no other, as yourself commanded:    Which not to have done I think had been in me    Both disobedience and ingratitude    To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,    Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely    That it was yours.   Now, for conspiracy,    I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd    For me to try how: all I know of it    Is that Camillo was an honest man;    And why he left your court, the gods themselves,    Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.
Promise me friendship, but perform none:   if thou    wilt not promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art    a man! if thou dost perform, confound thee, for    thou art a man!
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
Because he should have swallowed me too: and when I    had been in his belly, I would have kept such a    jangling of the bells, that he should never have    left,   till he cast bells, steeple, church, and    parish up again. But if the good King Simonides    were of my mind,
I take no heed of thee; thou'rt an Athenian,therefore welcome: I myself would have no power;prithee, let my meat make thee silent.
[aside]  Well begun, Tranio.
Thomas the earl of Surrey and himself,Much about cockshut time, from troop to troopWent through the army cheering up the soldiers.
Yea, my good lord.
No. Hell say twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
You are too hot.
How now! what's the matter?
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a hare.   His dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity and denying him.   And for his cowardship, ask Fabian.
Ay, marry, what of these?
Ay, my commander. When I presented Ceres,I thought to have told thee of it, but I fearedLest I might anger thee.
Oh, the heavens!    What foul play had we that we came from thence?    Or blessèd was t we did?
Whither wilt thou have me?
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feedMost hungerly on your sight.
I would my tongue could rot them off!
You are a lover. Borrow Cupids wingsAnd soar with them above a common bound.
No, I hear not your honest friend, I hear you.
Titus, I am come to talk with thee.
Why, boy! Why, wag! How now! What's the matter?Look up; speak.
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
What would you with her, if that I be she?
Your Worship is deceived. The gown is made Just as my master had direction.Grumio gave order how it should be done.
Go, fool, and whom thou keepst command.
Iago.
But how did you desire it should be made?
[aside]  Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.
Do you know what you say?
O Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy:    Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours,    A long-tongued babbling gossip? no, lords, no:    And now be it known to you my full intent.    Not far, one Muli lives, my countryman;    His wife but yesternight was brought to bed;    His child is like to her, fair as you are:    Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,    And tell them both the circumstance of all;    And how by this their child shall be advanced,    And be received for the emperor's heir,    And substituted in the place of mine,    To calm this tempest whirling in the court;    And let the emperor dandle him for his own.    Hark ye, lords; ye see I have given her physic,
How now, my sweet Bianca! How now, how now?
From whom?
Yet again? What do you here? Shall we give o'er and drown?Have you a mind to sink?
My lord!
I am all the daughters of my fathers house,    And all the brothers tooand yet I know not.    Sir, shall I to this lady?
Will he woo her? Ay, or Ill hang her.
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his    sworn brother, a very simple gentleman!   I have sold    all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a    ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,    knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,    to keep my pack from fasting:   they throng who    should buy first, as if my trinkets had been    hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:    by which means I saw whose purse was best in    picture; and what I saw, to my good use I    remembered.   My clown, who wants but something to    be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the    wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes    till he had both tune and words;   which so drew the    rest of the herd to me that all their other senses    stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it    was senseless;   'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a    purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in    chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song,    and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this    time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their    festival purses;   and had not the old man come in    with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's    son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not    left a purse alive in the whole army.
Who is t you mean?
Not I. What are you?
How do you, Cassio?Oh, a chair, a chair!
[as VINCENTIO]  Whats he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
Go you before, and I will follow you.
[aside]  Out, devil! I do remember them too well:Thou killedst my husband Henry in the Tower, And Edward, my poor son, at Tewkesbury.
Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I amsworn not to give regard to you. Farewell; and comewith better music.
Even so. An please your Worship, Brakenbury,    You may partake of anything we say.    We speak no treason, man. We say the king    Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen    Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous.    We say that Shores wife hath a pretty foot,    A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue,    And that the queens kindred are made gentlefolks.    How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
I think I can discover him, if you please To get good guard and go along with me.
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
[aside to ARIEL]  Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.
Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.
Be patient. They are friends, Ratcliffe and Lovell.
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee    And wish thee to a shrewd, ill-favored wife?    Thoudst thank me but a little for my counsel;    And yet Ill promise thee she shall be rich,    And very rich.   But thou'rt too much my friend,    And Ill not wish thee to her.
Im out of patience.
What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
I call them forth to credit her.
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.Did you and he consent in Cassios death?
O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.
With all my heart, and much it joys me tooTo see you are become so penitent.Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.
Here comes the fool, i' faith.
I do not like the Tower, of any place.Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
Ay, Timon, and have cause.
I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?
A daughter, and a goodly babe,Lusty and like to live: the queen receivesMuch comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,I am innocent as you.'
If you bethink yourself of any crimeUnreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, Solicit for it straight.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
I thank his Grace. I know he loves me well.    But for his purpose in the coronation,    I have not sounded him, nor he delivered    His gracious pleasure any way therein.    But you, my honorable lords, may name the time,    And in the dukes behalf Ill give my voice,    Which I presume hell take in gentle part.
Two or three groan. 'Tis heavy night,These may be counterfeits. Lets think t unsafe To come in to the cry without more help.
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
Lord Mayor
First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.  [Exit MAMILLIUS]  Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
Not so hot, good sir:    I come to bring him sleep.   'Tis such as you,    That creep like shadows by him and do sigh    At each his needless heavings, such as you    Nourish the cause of his awaking:   I    Do come with words as medicinal as true,    Honest as either, to purge him of that humour    That presses him from sleep.
Ho, ho, confess'd it! hang'd it, have you not?
She dances featly.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Shes the worse for all this.
Signior Hortensio, twixt such friends as we    Few words suffice.   And therefore, if thou know    One rich enough to be Petruchios wife,    As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,    Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,    As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd    As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,    She moves me not, or not removes at least    Affections edge in me, were she as rough    As are the swelling Adriatic seas.    I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;    If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed;And then with what haste you can get you to bed.
Lead me on.
Now in good time here comes the duke of York.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?    Is Romeo slaughtered, and is Tybalt dead?    My dearest cousin and my dearer lord?    Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!    For who is living if those two are gone?
Alls one. Good Father, how foolish are our minds!If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud meIn one of these same sheets.
Now will I hence about thy business,And take my ministers along with me.
'Tis so, be sure of it.
Good Father, I beseech you on my knees,Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Why, whats the matter? Does he rave?
No, sooth, sir. My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a touchof modesty that you will not extort from me what I am willing to keep in.   Therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express myself.   You must know of me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian, which I called Roderigo. My father was that Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard of.   He left behind him myself and a sister, both born in an hour. If the heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended!   But you, sir, altered that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was my sister drowned.
What stays had I but they? And they are gone.
But to have divinity preached there! did you everdream of such a thing?
First mend my company, take away thyself.
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?
Here, with a cup that's stored unto the brim,    As you do love, fill to your mistress' lips,    We drink this health to you.
Whats this? Whats this?
Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine That they may fairly note this act of mine.
I am at your grace's pleasure.
What is the matter, lady?
Even he, sir. Did you know him?
Gracious Olivia
Happily met, my lady and my wife.
If she'ld do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?
The gain I seek is quiet in the match.
Why let it strike?
That had, give't these fellowsTo whom 'tis instant due. Ne'er speak, or think,That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.
He well may be a stranger, for he comesTo an honour'd triumph strangely furnished.
Will 't hold? will 't hold?
And brief, good mother, for I am in haste.
[Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!
Mark, how strange it shows,    Timon in this should pay more than he owes:    And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels,    And send for money for 'em.
A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave!    Come, Kate, sit down. I know you have a stomach.    Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?    Whats this? Mutton?
I know not.
And came I not at last to comfort you?
[aside to ANTONIO]  The next advantageWill we take throughly.
Go to, thou art made, if thou desirest to be so
Have you scored me? Well.
Son, Ill be your half Bianca comes.
O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce    'Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler    Of Hymen's purest bed! thou valiant Mars!    Thou ever young, fresh, loved and delicate wooer,    Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow    That lies on Dian's lap!   thou visible god,    That solder'st close impossibilities,    And makest them kiss! that speak'st with    every tongue,    To every purpose!   O thou touch of hearts!    Think, thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue    Set them into confounding odds, that beasts    May have the world in empire!
Sweetly in force unto her fair lifes end.
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.    [To his PAGE]   Fetch me my rapier, boy.    What, dares the slave    Come hither, covered with an antic face,    To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?    Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,    To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
No news so bad abroad as this at home:The king is sickly, weak and melancholy,And his physicians fear him mightily.
Why I your purse?
They are, my liege;And stay your coming to present themselves.
Aha! Does she so?
Come, hang them on this line.
No, in good earnest.    How sometimes nature will betray its folly,    Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime    To harder bosoms!   Looking on the lines    Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil    Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,    In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,    Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,    As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:    How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,    This squash, this gentleman.   Mine honest friend,    Will you take eggs for money?
[to ANTONIO]  He receives comfort like cold porridge.
Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up.
What! have I twice said well? when was't before?    I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's    As fat as tame things:   one good deed dying tongueless    Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.    Our praises are our wages:   you may ride's    With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere    With spur we beat an acre.   But to the goal:    My last good deed was to entreat his stay:    What was my first?   it has an elder sister,    Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!    But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?    Nay, let me have't; I long.
Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress' gown for thy masters use!
[as LUCENTIO]  Even he, Biondello.
Know you these two?
Cassio!
The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the    extremity of both ends:   when thou wast in thy gilt    and thy perfume, they mocked thee for too much    curiosity;   in thy rags thou knowest none, but art    despised for the contrary. There's a medlar for    thee, eat it.
No, tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a church-door, but tis enough, twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man.   I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat to scratch a man to death!   A braggart, a rogue, a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic!   Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Why, of mankind.
Now will I to that old Andronicus;    And temper him with all the art I have,    To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.    And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again,    And bury all thy fear in my devices.
Nurse?
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyesFirst hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Yes, if you will, my lord.
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;therefore it behoves men to be wary.
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,For he was great of heart.
O me, O me! My child, my only life,Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!Help, help! Call help.
How now, Marina! why do you keep alone?    How chance my daughter is not with you?   Do not    Consume your blood with sorrowing: you have    A nurse of me. Lord, how your favour's changed    With this unprofitable woe!    Come, give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it.    Walk with Leonine; the air is quick there,    And it pierces and sharpens the stomach.   Come,    Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her.
What if I do not? as, indeed, I do not;    Yet, for I know thou art religious    And hast a thing within thee called conscience,    With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies,    Which I have seen thee careful to observe,    Therefore I urge thy oath;   for that I know    An idiot holds his bauble for a god    And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,    To that I'll urge him:   therefore thou shalt vow    By that same god, what god soe'er it be,    That thou adorest and hast in reverence,    To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up;    Or else I will discover nought to thee.
No, no, hes gone.
Noble sir,If you have told Diana's altar true,This is your wife.
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.  [To BIANCA]  What, do you shake at that?
What would you, Desdemona?
Yon king's to me like to my father's picture,    Which tells me in that glory once he was;    Had princes sit, like stars, about his throne,    And he the sun, for them to reverence;    None that beheld him, but, like lesser lights,    Did vail their crowns to his supremacy:    Where now his son's like a glow-worm in the night,    The which hath fire in darkness, none in light:    Whereby I see that Time's the king of men,    He's both their parent, and he is their grave,    And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
I need not tell him that; he knows you are too diligent.
Minion, thou liest. Is t not Hortensio?
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicionis not without wit and judgment. But, Roderigo, if thouhast that in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than everI mean purpose, courage and valorthis night show it.   If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.
Neighbors, God speed.
Then, noble auditory, be it known to you,    That cursed Chiron and Demetrius    Were they that murdered our emperor's brother;    And they it were that ravished our sister:    For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded;    Our father's tears despised, and basely cozen'd    Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out,    And sent her enemies unto the grave.    Lastly, myself unkindly banished,    The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out,    To beg relief among Rome's enemies:    Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears.    And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend.    I am the turned forth, be it known to you,    That have preserved her welfare in my blood;    And from her bosom took the enemy's point,    Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body.    Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I;    My scars can witness, dumb although they are,    That my report is just and full of truth.    But, soft! methinks I do digress too much,    Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me;    For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.
Not since widow Didos time.
Hortensio, peace. Thou knowst not golds effect.    Tell me her fathers name, and tis enough;    For I will board her, though she chide as loud    As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
You nymphs, called Naiads of the windring brooks,    With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks,    Leave your crisp channels and on this green land    Answer your summons, Juno does command.    Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate    A contract of true love. Be not too late.
Even here undone!    I was not much afeard; for once or twice    I was about to speak and tell him plainly,    The selfsame sun that shines upon his court    Hides not his visage from our cottage but    Looks on alike.   Will't please you, sir, be gone?    I told you what would come of this: beseech you,    Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,    Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,    But milk my ewes and weep.
The violent carriage of it    Will clear or end the business:   when the oracle,    Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,    Shall the contents discover, something rare    Even then will rush to knowledge.   Go: fresh horses!    And gracious be the issue!
The fee simple? O simple!
Dolor comes to him, indeed. You have spoken truer than you purposed.
Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
Are you full of them?
Of all say'd yet, mayst thou prove prosperous!Of all say'd yet, I wish thee happiness!
I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you.   I dare draw as soon as another man if I see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side.
I could marry this wench for this device.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Make your proof.
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.
Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak.    Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,    And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,    Who either by public war or private treason    Will take away your life.    Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,    Till that his rage and anger be forgot,    Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.    Your rule direct to any; if to me.    Day serves not light more faithful than I'll be.
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
But he, poor man, by your first order died,    And that a wingèd Mercury did bear.    Some tardy cripple bear the countermand,    That came too lag to see him burièd.    God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,    Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,    Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,    And yet go current from suspicion.
'Fore heaven, they have given me a rouse already.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.    I will to Venice.   Sunday comes apace.    We will have rings, and things, and fine array,    And kiss me, Kate.   We will be married o' Sunday.
And yet I fear you, for youre fatal then    When your eyes roll so.   Why I should fear I know not,    Since guiltiness I know not. But yet I feel I fear.
An angry brow, dread lord.
None in the world, nor do I know the man.
No, boy, not so; I'll teach thee another course.    Lavinia, come. Marcus, look to my house:    Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court:    Ay, marry, will we, sir; and we'll be waited on.
I think twas Soto that your Honor means.
Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with youthere for the goose?
I cannot tell. The world is grown so bad    That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.    Since every jack became a gentleman,    Theres many a gentle person made a jack.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
No, his mouth is stopped. Honest IagoHath ta'en order for t.
So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubtYou'ld call your children yours.
Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires to speak with you.
Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain. He gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.
No, by my life and soul!Send for the man and ask him.
Help, master, help! here's a fish hangs in the net,    like a poor man's right in the law; 'twill hardly    come out.   Ha! bots on't, 'tis come at last, and    'tis turned to a rusty armour.
Here, here! For heavens sake, help me!
His majesty,Tend'ring my persons safety, hath appointed This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
Long live so, and so die.
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we aregentlemen.
What, ho, Pilch!
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon    When it hath blown his ranks into the air    And, like the devil, from his very arm    Puffed his own brother   and is he angry?    Something of moment then, I will go meet him.    Theres matter in t indeed, if he be angry.
The senators of Athens: happy man!
My fortunesparentagegood parentageTo equal mine!was it not thus? what say you?
'Twas very strange.
O, calm thee, gentle lord; although I know    There is enough written upon this earth    To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts    And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.    My lord, kneel down with me; Lavinia, kneel;    And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope;    And swear with me, as, with the woful fere    And father of that chaste dishonour'd dame,    Lord Junius Brutus sware for Lucrece' rape,    That we will prosecute by good advice    Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths,    And see their blood, or die with this reproach.
How tall was she?
Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of allfashions: you shall fare well; you shall have thedifference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears?
Ha' you done?
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Thanks, noble peer;    The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.    What art thou? and how comest thou hither,    Where no man never comes but that sad dog    That brings me food to make misfortune live?
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.
To satisfy your highness and the entreatiesOf our most gracious mistress.
Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers themadman.  [reads]  By the Lord, madam,
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they shoulddesire to live.
And here he comes.All health, my sovereign lord.
Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes,    My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets,    If yet your gentle souls fly in the air    And be not fixed in doom perpetual,    Hover about me with your airy wings    And hear your mothers lamentation.
Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are?
So stands this squire    Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,    And leave you to your graver steps.   Hermione,    How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome;    Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:    Next to thyself and my young rover, he's    Apparent to my heart.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.    Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires    A sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer,    Much castigation, exercise devout,    For heres a young and sweating devil here,    That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand,    A frank one.
My lord, will't please you to fall to?
Fury, Fury! There, Tyrant, there. Hark, hark!
A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t'    attain to! If thou wert the lion, the fox would    beguile thee; if thou wert the lamb, the fox would    eat three:   if thou wert the fox, the lion would    suspect thee, when peradventure thou wert accused by    the ass: if thou wert the ass, thy dulness would    torment thee, and still thou livedst but as a    breakfast to the wolf:     if thou wert the wolf, thy    greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst    hazard thy life for thy dinner: wert thou the    unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee and    make thine own self the conquest of thy fury:   wert    thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by the horse:    wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the    leopard: wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to    the lion and the spots of thy kindred were jurors on    thy life:   all thy safety were remotion and thy    defence absence. What beast couldst thou be, that    were not subject to a beast? and what a beast art    thou already, that seest not thy loss in    transformation!
A plague upon him, dog!
Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear whatpitiful cries they made to us to help them, when,well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves.
Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none    but friends,    What Roman lord it was durst do the deed:    Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,    That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?
Now, by my mothers son, and thats myself,    It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,    Or e'er I journey to your fathers house.    [To servants]   Go on, and fetch our horses back again.    Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed!
King, be thy thoughts imperious, like thy name.    Is the sun dimm'd, that gnats do fly in it?    The eagle suffers little birds to sing,    And is not careful what they mean thereby,    Knowing that with the shadow of his wings    He can at pleasure stint their melody:    Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome.    Then cheer thy spirit : for know, thou emperor,    I will enchant the old Andronicus    With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous,    Than baits to fish, or honey-stalks to sheep,    When as the one is wounded with the bait,    The other rotted with delicious feed.
Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
Oh, it is monstrous, monstrous.    Methought the billows spoke and told me of it,    The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder,    That deep and dreadful organ pipe,   pronounced    The name of Prosper. It did bass my trespass.    Therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded,   and    Ill seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded    And with him there lie mudded.
'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.
The urging of that word judgment hath bred a kind of remorse in me.
I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftilyqualified too, and behold what innovation it makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.
Save you, friend Cassio!
Let all the rest give place.
Then I salute you with this royal title: Long live Richard, Englands worthy king!
Hark! I hear their drum.    Fight, gentlemen of England.Fight, bold yeomen.    Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head.    Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood.    Amaze the welkin with your broken staves
Now, in good time!
Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young soldier, put up your iron. You are well fleshed. Come on.
Sirrah, begone or talk not, I advise you.
O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,Where is my ladys lord? Wheres Romeo?
[t    o  ANDREW   ]  Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
And how does your contentTender your own good fortune?
[sings]      I shall no more to sea, to sea,    Here shall I die ashore     This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a mans funeral.    Well, heres my comfort.    [drinks, sings]      The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I,    The gunner and his mate    Loved Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery,    But none of us cared for Kate.    For she had a tongue with a tang,    Would cry to a sailor, Go hang!    She loved not the savor of tar nor of pitch,    Yet a tailor might scratch her where'ershe did itch.    Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!     This is a scurvy tune too. But heres my comfort.    [drinks]
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;    Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,    Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to moveAnd with her breath she did perfume the air. Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
Noble Timon,What friendship may I do thee?
Royally!Why, it contains no king?
Most grave Brabantio,In simple and pure soul I come to you
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stirKeeps good old York there with his men of war?
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.
Ill go, my lord, and tell him what you say.
O, she that might have intercepted thee,By strangling thee in her accursèd womb,From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done.
[as LUCENTIO]   Then at my lodging, an it like you.    There doth my father lie, and there this night    Well pass the business privately and well.    Send for your daughter by your servant here.    My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.    The worst is this, that at so slender warning    You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
That I did love the Moor to live with him,    My downright violence and storm of fortunes    May trumpet to the world. My hearts subdued    Even to the very quality of my lord.    I saw Othellos visage in his mind,    And to his honors and his valiant parts    Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.    So that, dear lords, if I be left behind    A moth of peace and he go to the war,    The rites for which I love him are bereft me,    And I a heavy interim shall support    By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
My lord, in heart; and let the health go round.
Ay, my good lord.
What is the matter, my lord?
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!    [aside]   My land amounts not to so much in all.    That she shall have, besides an argosy    That now is lying in Marcellus' road.    [To TRANIO]   What, have I choked you with an argosy?
What is the reason of this terrible summons?What is the matter there?
Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should be a fool,   whose skull Jove cram with brains, forhere he comesone of thy kin has a most weak    pia mater.
Her silence flouts me, and Ill be revenged.
Because I would be sure to have all well,To entertain your highness and your empress.
My thanks, sweet madam.
How now! what means death in this rude assault?Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Why, no, sir.
Ill signify so much unto him straight.
There is no world without Verona walls    But purgatory, torture, hell itself.    Hence banishèd is banished from the world,    And worlds exile is death.   Then banishèd,    Is death mistermed. Calling death banishment,    Thou cuttst my head off with a golden ax    And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.
She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify unto her.
This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,    By night frequents my house.   I am a man    That from my first have been inclined to thrift;    And my estate deserves an heir more raised    Than one which holds a trencher.
Whither?
Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you.I told him you were sick.   He takes on him to understandso much, and therefore comes to speak with you.   I told him you were asleep. He seems to have a foreknowledge ofthat too, and therefore comes to speak with you.   What is to be said to him, lady? Hes fortified against any denial.
Why the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world, and having the world for your labor, tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.
The news I have to tell your Majesty    Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters    Buckinghams army is dispersed and scattered,    And he himself wandered away alone,    No man knows whither.
Not I.
Here comes your father. Never make denial.I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
Madam, I'll sing.
Stay, fellow. I can read.   [He reads the letter]    Seigneur Martino and his wife and daughters;    County Anselme and his beauteous sisters;    The lady widow of Vitruvio;    Seigneur Placentio and his lovely nieces;    Mercutio and his brother Valentine;    Mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters;    My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;    Seigneur Valentio and his cousin Tybalt;    Lucio and the lively Helena.    A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself;    A madman so long, now a fool. What, think'st    That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,    Will put thy shirt on warm?   will these moss'd trees,    That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels,    And skip where thou point'st out? will the    cold brook,    Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste,    To cure thy o'er-night's surfeit?   Call the creatures    Whose naked natures live in an the spite    Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,    To the conflicting elements exposed,    Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee;    O, thou shalt find
[aside]  Odors, pregnant, and vouchsafed. Ill get'em all three all ready.
O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart    Would I were dead, so you did live again!    O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping;    My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.
No, I'll none of you.
Nay, hes a flower. In faith, a very flower.
Death and damnation! Oh!
Anon, anon. Come, let's away. The strangers are all gone.
What does his lordship mean?
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
The gods of Greece protect you!And we'll pray for you.
Yea, noise? Then Ill be brief. O happy dagger,This is thy sheath. There rust and let me die.  [Stabs herself with ROMEOs dagger and dies]
It shall no longer grieve without reproof.
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.
Oh, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
How now, whats the matter? My old friend Grumio and my good friend Petruchio? How do you all at Verona?
Voice and favour!You are, you areO royal Pericles!
Now Margarets curse is fall'n upon our heads,When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I, For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.
Now sleep y-slaked hath the rout;    No din but snores the house about,    Made louder by the o'er-fed breast    Of this most pompous marriage-feast.    The cat, with eyne of burning coal,    Now crouches fore the mouse's hole;    And crickets sing at the oven's mouth,    E'er the blither for their drouth.    Hymen hath brought the bride to bed.    Where, by the loss of maidenhead,    A babe is moulded.   Be attent,    And time that is so briefly spent    With your fine fancies quaintly eche:    What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech.
For the love o' God, peace!
Ah keeper, keeper, I have done those things,    That now give evidence against my soul,    For Edwards sake, and see how he requites me.    O God, if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,    But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,    Yet execute thy wrath in me alone!    O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!    Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile.    My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
My mistress, dearest, and I thus humble ever.
Good Helicane, that stay'd at home,    Not to eat honey like a drone    From others' labours; for though he strive    To killen bad, keep good alive;    And to fulfil his prince' desire,    Sends word of all that haps in Tyre:    How Thaliard came full bent with sin    And had intent to murder him;    And that in Tarsus was not best    Longer for him to make his rest.    He, doing so, put forth to seas,    Where when men been, there's seldom ease;    For now the wind begins to blow;    Thunder above and deeps below    Make such unquiet, that the ship    Should house him safe is wreck'd and split;    And he, good prince, having all lost,    By waves from coast to coast is tost:    All perishen of man, of pelf,    Ne aught escapen but himself;    Till fortune, tired with doing bad,    Threw him ashore, to give him glad:    And here he comes. What shall be next,    Pardon old Gower,this longs the text.
By this our mother is forever shamed.
I am content.
And you, sir, to outlive the age I am,And die as I would do.
Do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
'Tis he. Oh, brave Iago, honest and just,    That hast such noble sense of thy friends wrong!    Thou teachest me.   Minion, your dear lies dead,    And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come.    For, of my heart, those charms, thine eyes, are blotted.    Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lusts blood be spotted.
Prithee, no more; cease; thou know'st    He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure,    When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches    Will bring me to consider that which may    Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.    Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;    For she did print your royal father off,    Conceiving you:   were I but twenty-one,    Your father's image is so hit in you,    His very air, that I should call you brother,    As I did him, and speak of something wildly    By us perform'd before.   Most dearly welcome!    And your fair princess,goddess!O, alas!    I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth    Might thus have stood begetting wonder as    You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost    All mine own follythe society,    Amity too, of your brave father, whom,    Though bearing misery, I desire my life    Once more to look on him.
O, Apemantus, you are welcome.
Save thee, Timon.
Get you all three into the boxtree.   Malvolios coming down this walk. He has been yonder i' the sun practisingbehavior to his own shadow this half hour.   Observe him,for the love of mockery, for I know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of him.   Close, in the name ofjesting!
If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself into stitches, follow me.   Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very renegado. For there is no Christian thatmeans to be saved by believing rightly can ever believesuch impossible passages of grossness.   Hes in yellow stockings.
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think itThat he would steal away so guilty-likeSeeing you coming.
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
I know of none,    Nor know I you by voice or any feature.    I hate ingratitude more in a man    Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness,    Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption    Inhabits our frail blood
Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,    But basely yielded upon compromise    That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:    More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
What say you?
Sir, she is mortal.    But by immortal providence, shes mine.    I chose her when I could not ask my father    For his advice, nor thought I had one.   She    Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,    Of whom so often I have heard renown    But never saw before,   of whom I have    Received a second life. And second father    This lady makes him to me.
Anon!
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.
Oh, pardon me, twill do me good to walk.
I think it freely, and betimes in the morning I will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I amdesperate of my fortunes if they check me.
No, sir.
Is he won yet?
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,I will stand betwixt you and danger.
Whose tongue?
It may be so, for it is not mine own.Are you at leisure, holy Father, now,Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
In this last tempest. I perceive these lords    At this encounter do so much admire    That they devour their reason and scarce think    Their eyes do offices of truth, their words    Are natural breath.   But howsoev'r you have    Been justled from your senses, know for certain    That I am Prospero and that very duke    Which was thrust forth of Milan,   who most strangely    Upon this shore where you were wracked, was landed,    To be the lord on t.   No more yet of this,    For tis a chronicle of day by day,    Not a relation for a breakfast, nor    Befitting this first meeting.     [to ALONSO]    Welcome, sir.    This cells my court. Here have I few attendants    And subjects none abroad. Pray you, look in.    My dukedom since you have given me again,    I will requite you with as good a thing,    At least bring forth a wonder to content ye    As much as me my dukedom.
I do, my lord, but long I shall not stay there. I shall return before your Lordship thence.
But now, my lord.
Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.
Drunk?
Master, master! News, old news, and such news as you never heard of!
Why, that he didI know not what he did.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes    Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you.    Ah, my mistresses! Which of you all    Will now deny to dance?   She that makes dainty,    She, Ill swear, hath corns. Am I come near ye now?    Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day    That I have worn a visor and could tell    A whispering tale in a fair ladys ear    Such as would please.   Tis gone, tis gone, tis gone.    You are welcome, gentlemen.Come, musicians, play.    [Music plays and they dance]    A hall, a hall, give room!And foot it, girls.    More light, you knaves! And turn the tables up,    And quench the fire. The room is grown too hot.    Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.    Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,    For you and I are past our dancing days.    How long is t now since last yourself and I    Were in a mask?
Beat me?
Nay, do not say, 'stand up;'    Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.'    And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,    'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.    I never long'd to hear a word till now;    Say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how:    The word is short, but not so short as sweet;    No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.
Peter, didst ever see the like?
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!    That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;    This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.    Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,    Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck    Of that proud man that did usurp his back?    Forgiveness, horse!   why do I rail on thee,    Since thou, created to be awed by man,    Wast born to bear?   I was not made a horse;    And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,    Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.
Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
We will ourself in person to this war:    And, for our coffers, with too great a court    And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,    We are inforced to farm our royal realm;    The revenue whereof shall furnish us    For our affairs in hand:   if that come short,    Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;    Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,    They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold    And send them after to supply our wants;    For we will make for Ireland presently.
It gives a very echo to the seatWhere Love is throned.
[to RICHARD]    Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,    I, that was washed to death with fulsome wine,    Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death.    Tomorrow in the battle think on me,    And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair, and die!     [to RICHMOND]    Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster,    The wrongèd heirs of York do pray for thee    Good angels guard thy battle. Live and flourish.
What trumpet is that same?
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
Imprison'd is he, say you?
I go, my lord.
No, my good lord; he speaks the common tongue,Which all men speak with him.
Assurance bless your thoughts!
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,    Were jocund and supposed their states were sure,    And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;    But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.    This sudden stab of rancor I misdoubt.    Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!    What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
Whose house?
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
Conceives by me? How likes Hortensio that?
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!    Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,    Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue    Which she hath praised him with above compare    So many thousand times?   Go, counselor!    Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.    I'll to the friar, to know his remedy.    If all else fail, myself have power to die.
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad.This is a manold, wrinkled, faded, withered And not a maiden, as thou sayst he is.
I am for thee straight. Take thou the bill, give me thymete- yard, and spare not me.
I am sorry to hear this.
Is that true? Why, then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.
Ay, sooth, so humbledThat he hath left part of his grief with me To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
They are fairly welcome.
Ay, madam.
Arm, arm, my lord. The foe vaunts in the field.
Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.
Oh, fie upon thee, slanderer!
Sit down, sweet niece: brother, sit down by me.    Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury,    Inspire me, that I may this treason find!    My lord, look here: look here, Lavinia:    This sandy plot is plain;   guide, if thou canst    This after me, when I have writ my name    Without the help of any hand at all.
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough,    But riches fineless is as poor as winter    To him that ever fears he shall be poor.    Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend    From jealousy!
Tut, tut!    Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:    I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace'    In an ungracious mouth is but profane.    Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs    Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?    But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march    So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,    Frighting her pale-faced villages with war    And ostentation of despised arms?    Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?    Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,    And in my loyal bosom lies his power.    Were I but now the lord of such hot youth    As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself    Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,    From forth the ranks of many thousand French,    O, then how quickly should this arm of mine    Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee    And minister correction to thy fault!
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me haveSome patient leisure to excuse myself.
Sir, hes rash and very sudden in choler, and haply maystrike at you. Provoke him that he may. For even out ofthat will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but bythe displanting of Cassio.   So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means I shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.
You are resolute, then?
As if it had lungs, and rotten ones.
My husband!
[Reads the epitaph]   'Here lies a    wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft:    Seek not my name: a plague consume you wicked    caitiffs left!    Here lie I, Timon; who, alive, all living men did hate:    Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay    not here thy gait.'    These well express in thee thy latter spirits:    Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs,    Scorn'dst our brain's flow and those our    droplets which    From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit    Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye    On thy low grave, on faults forgiven.   Dead    Is noble Timon: of whose memory    Hereafter more.   Bring me into your city,    And I will use the olive with my sword,    Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each    Prescribe to other as each other's leech.    Let our drums strike.
Saw you my daughter?
You wish me well.    Being on shore, honouring of Neptune's triumphs,    Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,    I made to it, to know of whence you are.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Doubt it not, worthy lord.
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
I am your own for ever.
Yes, if it please your majesty.
No matter, then, who see it;I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Even in condition of the worst degree,    In gross rebellion and detested treason:    Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come    Before the expiration of thy time,    In braving arms against thy sovereign.
He is our cousin, cousin;   but 'tis doubt,    When time shall call him home from banishment,    Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.    Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green    Observed his courtship to the common people;    How he did seem to dive into their hearts    With humble and familiar courtesy,    What reverence he did throw away on slaves,    Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles    And patient underbearing of his fortune,    As 'twere to banish their affects with him.    Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;    A brace of draymen bid God speed him well    And had the tribute of his supple knee,    With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;'    As were our England in reversion his,    And he our subjects' next degree in hope.
Go to, woman,    Throw your vile guesses in the devils teeth    From whence you have them.   You are jealous now    That this is from some mistress, some remembrance.    No, in good troth, Bianca.
Never, but once.
I bleed still,I am hurt to the death. He dies!
Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a challenge.
A laughter.
He did, from first to last.Why dost thou ask?
Would all those fatterers were thine enemies then,that then thou mightst kill 'em and bid me to 'em!
Nothing, but this is so.
I did, with his contract with Lady Lucy    And his contract by deputy in France;    Th' unsatiate greediness of his desire    And his enforcement of the city wives;    His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,    As being got, your father then in France,    His resemblance being not like the duke.    Withal, I did infer your lineaments,    Being the right idea of your father,    Both in your form and nobleness of mind;    Laid open all your victories in Scotland,    Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace,    Your bounty, virtue, fair humility;    Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose    Untouched or slightly handled in discourse.    And when mine oratory grew toward end,    I bid them that did love their countrys good    Cry God save Richard, Englands royal king!
[Giving money]   There is they goldworse poison to men'ssouls,    Doing more murder in this loathsome world,    Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.    I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.    Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Excepting one, I would he were the bestIn all this presence that hath moved me so.
Gentlemen, there's some of worth would come aboard;I pray ye, greet them fairly.
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.And, madam, there is order ta'en for you;With all swift speed you must away to France.
Because that, like a jack, thou keepst the strokeBetwixt thy begging and my meditation.I am not in the giving vein today.
May it please your honour, Lord Lucius,Out of his free love, hath presented to youFour milk-white horses, trapp'd in silver.
Not so:I am as ignorant in that as youIn so entitling me, and no less honestThan you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant,As this world goes, to pass for honest.
How if it be false, son?
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;    Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.    Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land    Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;    And thou, too careless patient as thou art,    Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure    Of those physicians that first wounded thee:    A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,    Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;    And yet, incaged in so small a verge,    The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.    O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye    Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,    From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,    Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,    Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.    Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,    It were a shame to let this land by lease;    But for thy world enjoying but this land,    Is it not more than shame to shame it so?    Landlord of England art thou now, not king:    Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou
Yon light is not daylight, I know it, I.    It is some meteor that the sun exhales    To be to thee this night a torchbearer,    And light thee on thy way to Mantua.    Therefore stay yet. Thou needst not to be gone.
Believe me, I am not. I tell thee true.
God keep me from false friends, but they were none.
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am    I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast?   Three pound    of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,what will    this sister of mine do with rice? But my father    hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it    on.   She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for    the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good    ones; but they are most of them means and bases;   but    one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to    horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden    pies; mace; dates?none, that's out of my note;    nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I    may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of    raisins o' the sun.
Thou toldst meThou didst hold him in thy hate.
This is strange: methinksMy favour here begins to warp. Not speak?Good day, Camillo.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What, shall Ibe appointed hours as though, belike, I knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs meand as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
The worlds a huge thing. It is a great price for a small vice.
The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brothers soul being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Madam, yourself is not exempt in this,    Nor you, son Dorset, Buckingham, nor you.    You have been factious one against the other.    Wife, love Lord Hastings. Let him kiss your hand,    And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
My father had a mole upon his brow.
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,    Nor no such men as you have reckoned up,    As Stephen Sly and old John Naps of Greece,    And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell,    And twenty more such names and men as these,    Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
Religion groans at it.
Most veritable, therefore look to t well.
What thinkest thou of his opinion?
Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascallysheep-biter come by some notable shame?
Then certifies your Lordship that this night    He dreamt the boar had razèd his helm.    Besides, he says there are two councils kept,    And that may be determined at the one    Which may make you and him to rue at th' other.    Therefore he sends to know your Lordships pleasure,    If you will presently take horse with him    And with all speed post with him toward the north    To shun the danger that his soul divines.
Art thou a churchman?
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
The more my faultTo scape his hands where I was like to die.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Farewell, Andronicus: Revenge now goesTo lay a complot to betray thy foes.
Come on, assay. Theres one gone to the harbor?
Oh, devil, devil!    If that the earth could teem with womans tears,    Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.    Out of my sight!
[To MARIA]  Bless you, fair shrew.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand, andtis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle;    These quarrels must be quietly debated.    The feast is ready, which the careful Titus    Hath ordain'd to an honourable end,    For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome:    Please you, therefore, draw nigh, and take your places.
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues    A banish'd traitor:   all my treasury    Is yet but unfelt thanks,   which more enrich'd    Shall be your love and labour's recompense.
Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain odors on you!
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow?
By the king.
Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your    money presently.   Wife, take her in; instruct her    what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her    entertainment.
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land,    A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements.    If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea    What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,    Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
Let me entreat you.
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Do you observe this, Hostilius?
Come, sir, I pray you, go.
Here is everything advantageous to life.
God for his mercy! what a tide of woes    Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!    I know not what to do: I would to God,    So my untruth had not provoked him to it,    The king had cut off my head with my brother's.    What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?    How shall we do for money for these wars?  Come, sister,cousin, I would saypray, pardon me.Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some cartsAnd bring away the armour that is there.
Ill do t, but it dislikes me.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
No, not a whit, what. I have watched ere now All night for lesser cause, and neer been sick.
Nay, let me alone for swearing.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace,    Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman.    I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,    And how my men will stay themselves from laughter    When they do homage to this simple peasant.    Ill in to counsel them. Haply my presence    May well abate the over-merry spleen    Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
Madam, here comes my lord.
That which I gave you.
Husband?
Is this the madman?
I think this tale would win my daughter too.    Good Brabantio.   Take up this mangled matter at the best.    Men do their broken weapons rather use    Than their bare hands.
Not at all, good lady:You might have spoken a thousand things that wouldHave done the time more benefit and gracedYour kindness better.
And you must needs bestow her funeral;    The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms:    This done, see that you take no longer days,    But send the midwife presently to me.    The midwife and the nurse well made away,    Then let the ladies tattle what they please.
Wrought he not well that painted it?
Here comes Sir Toby halting. You shall hear more.   But if he had not been in drink, he would have tickled you othergates than he did.
Take the fool away.
My noble lord
Call'd MarinaFor I was born at sea.
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!    Be swift like lightning in the execution;    And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,    Fall like amazing thunder on the casque    Of thy adverse pernicious enemy:    Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.
Abhorrèd slave,    Which any print of goodness wilt not take,    Being capable of all ill!   I pitied thee,    Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour    One thing or other. When thou didst not, savage,    Know thine own meaning,   but wouldst gabble like    A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes    With words that made them known.   But thy vile race,    Though thou didst learn, had that in t which good natures    Could not abide to be with.   Therefore wast thou    Deservedly confined into this rock,    Who hadst deserved more than a prison.
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio? Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
My mind is changed.
Well, let us to the king: there is that in thisfardel will make him scratch his beard.
Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part    To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.    So, now I have mine own again, be gone,    That I might strive to kill it with a groan.
That's a lascivious apprehension.
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion.I do repent me that I put it to you.You would be satisfied?
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,    Because they have been still my adversaries.    But that Ill give my voice on Richards side    To bar my masters heirs in true descent,    God knows I will not do it, to the death.
Is it for him you do envy me so?    Nay, then you jest, and now I well perceive    You have but jested with me all this while.    I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
I faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?
[to TRINCULO]  Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou! I would my valiant master would destroy thee. I do not lie.
Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.
Very sooth, to-morrow.
Hark!
[as LUCENTIO]  I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, lets away.
(  aside  ) A fustian riddle!
Hilloa, loa!
Make that thy question, and go rot!    Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,    To appoint myself in this vexation, sully    The purity and whiteness of my sheets,    Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted    Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,    Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,    Who I do think is mine and love as mine,    Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?    Could man so blench?
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour    Lie at my mercy all mine enemies.    Shortly shall all my labors end, and thou    Shalt have the air at freedom. For a little    Follow, and do me service.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in s hand.    O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart,    And makst me call what I intend to do    A murder, which I thought a sacrifice!    I saw the handkerchief.
Indeed? Is t true?
Make me to see t, or at the least so prove it That the probation bear no hinge nor loopTo hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!
No, my good lord. Therefore be patient.
Young Romeo is it?
Monster, I do smell all horse piss, at which my nose isin great indignation.
But what says Jupiter, I ask thee?
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is halfflayed already.
'Tis very true. Thou didst it excellent.    Well, you are come to me in happy time,    The rather for I have some sport in hand    Wherein your cunning can assist me much.    There is a lord will hear you play tonight;    But I am doubtful of your modesties,    Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior    For yet his Honor never heard a play    You break into some merry passion    And so offend him.   For I tell you, sirs,    If you should smile, he grows impatient.
Come your ways; follow me.
Ill lay fourteen of my teethand yet, to my teen be itspoken, I have but fourshe is not fourteen. How long is it now to Lammastide?
I dare lay any money twill be nothing yet.
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,he'll be made an example.
Pursue him and entreat him to a peace.
Immortal Dian!
What? Strike his wife?
'Faith, that was not so well. Yet would I knewThat stroke would prove the worst!
O Publius, is not this a heavy case,To see thy noble uncle thus distract?
God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,    His deputy anointed in His sight,    Hath caused his death:   the which if wrongfully,    Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift    An angry arm against His minister.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
No, by the Holy Rood, thou knowst it well.    Thou camst on earth to make the earth my hell.    A grievous burden was thy birth to me;    Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;    Thy school days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious;    Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous;    Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,    More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred.    What comfortable hour canst thou name,    That ever graced me in thy company?
Now Ill tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest youmerry!
Nor I neither, by this heavenly light.I might do t as well i' th' dark.
Oh, I am fortunes fool!
There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, whichbears that office, to signify their pleasures.
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound    And crown what I profess with kind event    If I speak true!   If hollowly, invert    What best is boded me to mischief! I    Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world    Do love, prize, honor you.
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you. Soyou may continue and laugh at nothing still.
We were, fair queen,Two lads that thought there was no more behindBut such a day to-morrow as to-day,And to be boy eternal.
Worse and worse, mistress; she has here spoken holywords to the Lord Lysimachus.
What is the matter?
Nurse!
(  aside  ) Pistol him, pistol him.
Lawn as white as driven snow;    Cyprus black as e'er was crow;    Gloves as sweet as damask roses;    Masks for faces and for noses;    Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,    Perfume for a lady's chamber;    Golden quoifs and stomachers,    For my lads to give their dears:    Pins and poking-sticks of steel,    What maids lack from head to heel:    Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;    Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
My leg is cut in two.
[Within]  Servilius, help! My lord! my lord!
He shall see none to fear.
He said the truth. And what said Surrey then?
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.
Why, there they are both, baked in that pie;    Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,    Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.    'Tis true, 'tis true; witness my knife's sharp point.
The king? Whos that?
My lord, I have considered in my mind The late request that you did sound me in.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns roundI pray you, tell me what you meant by that.
On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,You said our work should cease.
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him; I had a Rutland too; thou holpst to kill him.
You witch me in it;    Surprise me to the very brink of tears:    Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,    And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.
You heard her say herself it was not I.
If there be devils, would I were a devil,    To live and burn in everlasting fire,    So I might have your company in hell,    But to torment you with my bitter tongue!
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     My gracious lady, go,    And thither bear your treasure and your goods.    For my part, Ill resign unto your Grace    The seal I keep; and so betide to me    As well I tender you and all of yours.    Go. Ill conduct you to the sanctuary.
I tell you tis not very well. I will make myself knownto Desdemona.   If she will return me my jewels I will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
He has made too much plenty with 'em;    He's a sworn rioter: he has a sin that often    Drowns him, and takes his valour prisoner:    If there were no foes, that were enough    To overcome him: in that beastly fury    He has been known to commit outrages,    And cherish factions:   'tis inferr'd to us,    His days are foul and his drink dangerous.
O my lord!I would your spirit were easier for advice,Or stronger for your need.
No, my lord, I'll fight.
I had been happy if the general camp,    Pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet body,    So I had nothing known. Oh, now forever    Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!    Farewell the plumèd troops and the big wars    That makes ambition virtue! Oh, farewell!    Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,    The spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife,    The royal banner, and all quality,    Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!    And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats    The immortal Joves dead clamors counterfeit,    Farewell! Othellos occupations gone.
No, my good lord. Therefore mistrust me not.
[as LUCENTIO]  Well, sir, to do you courtesy,This will I do, and this I will advise you.First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high,the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship becleared of the dead.
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,    Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!    Where shall we dine?   O me! What fray was here?    Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.    Heres much to do with hate but more with love.    Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,    O anything of nothing first created!    O heavy lightness, serious vanity,    Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!    Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,    Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!    This love feel I, that feel no love in this.    Dost thou not laugh?
Shes not fourteen.
Bring us to his cave:It is our part and promise to the AtheniansTo speak with Timon.
Nay, by Saint Jamy, I hold you a penny,A horse and a manIs more than oneAnd yet not many.
No, to Whitefriars. There attend my coming.
Marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.
Father, what news? What is the Princes doom? What sorrow craves acquaintance at my handThat I yet know not?
So please you, madam,To put apart these your attendants, IShall bring Emilia forth.
Still so cruel?
My lord?
Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you. Because we come to do you service and you think we are ruffians, youll have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse.   Youll have your nephews neigh to you. Youll have coursers for cousins and gennets for germans.
A gentleman.
Was ever woman in this humor wooed?    Was ever woman in this humor won?    Ill have her, but I will not keep her long.    What, I that killed her husband and his father,    To take her in her hearts extremest hate,    With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,    The bleeding witness of my hatred by,    Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,    And I no friends to back my suit at all    But the plain devil and dissembling looks?    And yet to win her, all the world to nothing! Ha!    Hath she forgot already that brave prince,    Edward, her lord, whom I some three months since    Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewkesbury?    A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,    Framed in the prodigality of nature,    Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,    The spacious world cannot again afford.    And will she yet abase her eyes on me,    That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince    And made her widow to a woeful bed?    On me, whose all not equals Edwards moiety?    On me, that halts and am misshapen thus?    My dukedom to a beggarly denier,    I do mistake my person all this while!    Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,    Myself to be a marv'lous proper man.    Ill be at charges for a looking glass    And entertain a score or two of tailors    To study fashions to adorn my body.    Since I am crept in favor with myself,    I will maintain it with some little cost.    But first Ill turn yon fellow in his grave    And then return lamenting to my love.    Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,    That I may see my shadow as I pass.
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.    Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,    Of these supposèd crimes to give me leave    By circumstance but to acquit myself.
Fear not, Baptista, we will content you. Go to. But I will in to be revenged for this villany.
Come forth, I say! Theres other business for thee.Come, thou tortoise! When?
[reads]  This fail you not to do, as you will
If my hearts dear love
Then we are rid of Litio.
Oh, sweet England!     (sings)      King Stephen was a worthy peer,      His breeches cost him but a crown,      He held them sixpence all too dear,        With that he called the tailor lown.      He was a wight of high renown,      And thou art but of low degree,      'Tis pride that pulls the country down,      Then take thine auld cloak about thee.     Some wine, ho!
The worser that you give me the additionWhose want even kills me.
And may you prove, sir, master of your art.
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,    When thou wert king;   who, travelling towards York,    With much ado at length have gotten leave    To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.    O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld    In London streets, that coronation-day,    When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,    That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,    That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: upwith't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requiresnothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, goodboy, the next way home.
E'en so, sir, as I say.   And, for thy fiction,    Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth    That thou art even natural in thine art.    But, for all this, my honest-natured friends,    I must needs say you have a little fault:    Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I    You take much pains to mend.
He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.
My name is Roderigo.
My pretty cousins, you mistake me both.    I do lament the sickness of the king,    As loath to lose him, not your fathers death.    It were lost sorrow to wail one thats lost.
Very well.
Possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.
Come, come! You talk!
Why, man?
Peace, and be still.
Ay, my lord: and fear    We have landed in ill time:   the skies look grimly    And threaten present blusters.   In my conscience,    The heavens with that we have in hand are angry    And frown upon's.
Where liest o' nights, Timon?
Thou speak'st like him's untutor'd to repeat:    Who makes the fairest show means most deceit.    But bring they what they will and what they can,    What need we fear?    The ground's the lowest, and we are half way there.    Go tell their general we attend him here,    To know for what he comes, and whence he comes,    And what he craves.
Ill see thee hanged on Sunday first.
What is your parentage?    Above my fortunes, yet my state is well.    I am a gentleman.   Ill be sworn thou art;    Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit,    Do give thee fivefold blazon.   Not too fast! Soft, soft!    Unless the master were the man. How now?    Even so quickly may one catch the plague?    Methinks I feel this youths perfections    With an invisible and subtle stealth    To creep in at mine eyes.   Well, let it be.    What ho, Malvolio!
Oh, ho! Do you come near me now? No worse man than SirToby to look to me. This concurs directly with the letter.   She sends him on purpose that I may appear stubborn to him, for she incites me to that in the letter.   Cast thy humble slough, says she. Be oppositewith a kinsman, surly with servants. Let thy tongue tang with arguments of state. Put thyself into the trickof singularity, and consequently sets down the manner how:   as, a sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue,in the habit of some sir of note, and so forth.   I have limed her, but it is Joves doing, and Jove make me thankful!   And when she went away now, Let this fellow be looked to. Fellow! Not Malvolio, nor after my degree, but fellow.   Why, everything adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstancewhat canbe said?   Nothing that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is thedoer of this, and he is to be thanked.
Some wine, ho!     (sings)        And let me the cannikin clink, clink,      And let me the cannikin clink.      A soldiers a man,      A lifes but a span,      Why then let a soldier drink.     Some wine, boys!
Nay, that you shall not. Since you have begun,Have at you for a bitter jest or two!
Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.
If further yet you will be satisfied,Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves,He would depart, I'll give some light unto you.Being at Antioch
Upon what cause?
Well, my good lady.  [aside]  Oh, hardness to dissemble!How do you, Desdemona?
Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory?    [Aside]    I am glad on't with all my heart.    I'll tame you; I'll bring you in subjection.    Will you, not having my consent,    Bestow your love and your affections    Upon a stranger?   who, for aught I know,    May be, nor can I think the contrary,    As great in blood as I myself.    Therefore hear you, mistress; either frame    Your will to mine,   and you, sir, hear you,    Either be ruled by me, or I will make you    Man and wife:    Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too:    And being join'd, I'll thus your hopes destroy;    And for a further grief,God give you joy!    What, are you both pleased?
O Gods lady dear,    Are you so hot?   Marry, come up, I trow.    Is this the poultice for my aching bones?    Henceforward do your messages yourself.
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself.'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
Royal Antiochuson what cause I know not    Took some displeasure at him; at least he judged so:    And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd,    To show his sorrow, he'ld correct himself;    So puts himself unto the shipman's toil,    With whom each minute threatens life or death.
It is: and yours too, Isidore?
But sir, to love concerneth us to add    Her fathers liking,   which to bring to pass,    As I before unparted to your worship,    I am to get a manwhate'er he be    It skills not much, well fit him to our turn    And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa    And make assurance here in Padua    Of greater sums than I have promisèd.    So shall you quietly enjoy your hope    And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
My good Camillo,She is as forward of her breeding asShe is i' the rear our birth.
Is it concluded that he shall be Protector?
He misses not much.
Oh, thats well saidthe chair!    Some good man bear him carefully from hence.    Ill fetch the generals surgeon.    (to BIANCA)    For you, mistress,    Save you your labor.He that lies slain here, Cassio,    Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
Where be these knaves?   What, no man at door    To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!    Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
O, that must be    I' the virtue of your daughter:   one being dead,    I shall have more than you can dream of yet;    Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,    Contract us 'fore these witnesses.
O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.
That Ill try.
Dost dialogue with thy shadow?
I know thee well;But in thy fortunes am unlearn'd and strange.
By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly over me. The malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours.   Therefore I shall crave of you your leave that I may bear my evils alone. It   were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you.
An offer, uncle, that we will accept:    But we must win your grace to go with us    To Bristol castle, which they say is held    By Bushy, Bagot and their complices,    The caterpillars of the commonwealth,    Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
I must eat my dinner.    This islands mine, by Sycorax my mother,    Which thou takest from me.   When thou camest first,    Thou strokst me and made much of me, wouldst give me    Water with berries in t,   and teach me how    To name the bigger light, and how the less,    That burn by day and night.   And then I loved thee    And showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle,    The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile.    Cursed be I that did so! All the charms    Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!    For I am all the subjects that you have,    Which first was mine own king.   And here you sty me    In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me    The rest o' th' island.
That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou,
She conjures: away with her! Would she had never    come within my doors! Marry, hang you! She's born    to undo us.   Will you not go the way of women-kind?    Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!
Now, sir, what is your text?
Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
'Tis a villain, sir,I do not love to look on.
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.
To th' platform, masters. Come, lets set the watch.
Search the market narrowly; Mytilene is full ofgallants. We lost too much money this mart by beingtoo wenchless.
An hour before I came, the duchess died.
Is t possible?
Bear her my true loves kiss; and so, farewell.
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain. Well are you welcome to the open air.How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?
Sorrow and grief of heart    Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man    Yet he is come.
[Giving her a ring]  O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight, And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Shes a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me. Whato' that?
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.    He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.    I am no pilot. Yet, wert thou as far    As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,    I would adventure for such merchandise.
[Aside to GREGORY]   Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Her husband, sirrah?
And I as I love Hastings with my heart.
Moved, in good time. Let him that moved you hitherRemove you hence. I knew you at the firstYou were a moveable.
Good my lord,She came from Libya.
A pair of stocks, you rogue!
Before the days of change, still is it so.    By a divine instinct, mens minds mistrust    Ensuing dangers,   as by proof we see    The water swell before a boist'rous storm.    But leave it all to God. Whither away?
I would you were as I would have you be!
Go to. Where lodges he?
I did not, sir:These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,Can clear me in't.
Hail, worthy Timon!
[as LITIO]  Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said, Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.  They stand aside
Why, that was he.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Heres Romeos man. We found him in the churchyard.
O, well said, Lucius!Good boy, in Virgo's lap; give it Pallas.
Alack, for pity!    I, not remembering how I cried out then,    Will cry it o'er again. It is a hint    That wrings mine eyes to t.
Sir,    Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king;    A man who for this three months hath not spoken    To any one, nor taken sustenance    But to prorogue his grief.
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.    I was too hot to do somebody good    That is too cold in thinking of it now.    Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;    He is franked up to fatting for his pains.    God pardon them that are the cause thereof.
Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for    your oration;   and let him deliver the pigeons to    the emperor from you.
I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' the ass.
But amongst honest women.
How now?
I thought she had some great matter there in hand;for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, eversince the death of Hermione, visited that removedhouse. Shall we thither and with our company piecethe rejoicing?
Why, they stay at door, sir.
Madam, we'll play at bowls.
Either thou wilt die by Gods just ordinance    Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,    Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish    And nevermore behold thy face again.    Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse,    Which in the day of battle tire thee more    Than all the complete armor that thou wearst.    My prayers on the adverse party fight,    And there the little souls of Edwards children    Whisper the spirits of thine enemies    And promise them success and victory.    Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end.    Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
Because my name is George.
[Skims the letter]   This letter doth make good the friars words,    Their course of love, the tidings of her death.    And here he writes that he did buy a poison    Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal    Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.    Where be these enemies?Capulet! Montague!    See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,    That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!    And I, for winking at your discords, too    Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.
Why, man?
Taurus! Thats sides and heart.
What wouldst thou have to Athens?
Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is;    For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:    Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?
Mercutio, thou consortst with Romeo.
Come on, then,And give't me in mine ear.
A thousand more mischances than this oneHave learn'd me how to brook this patiently.
What is a whoremaster, fool?
To-night, to-night. But, mistress, do you know theFrench knight that cowers i' the hams?
I have said too much unto a heart of stone    And laid mine honor too unchary on t.    Theres something in me that reproves my fault,    But such a headstrong potent fault it is    That it but mocks reproof.
(  aside  ) Fie on him, Jezebel!
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,    Doth not thy embassage belong to me,    And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st    To serve me last, that I may longest keep    Thy sorrow in my breast.   Come, ladies, go,    To meet at London London's king in woe.    What, was I born to this, that my sad look    Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?    Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,    Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
Hold, for your lives!
[Aside]  If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.
I pray now, keep below.
'Tis his description.
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
Go hence. Good night. And here stands all your state:    Either be gone before the watch be set,    Or by the break of day disguised from hence.    Sojourn in Mantua. Ill find out your man,    And he shall signify from time to time    Every good hap to you that chances here.    Give me thy hand. Tis late. Farewell, good night.
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
Look back! Defend thee! Here are enemies.
Hail, reverend sir! the gods preserve you!
All for our vantage. Then, in Gods name, march.True hope is swift, and flies with swallows wings.Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
[to RODERIGO]     Farewell, for I must leave you.    It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place,    To be producted (as, if I stay, I shall)    Against the Moor.   For I do know the state    (However this may gall him with some check)    Cannot with safety cast him,   for hes embarked    With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars    (Which even now stand in act) that, for their souls,    Another of his fathom they have none    To lead their business.   In which regard,    Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,    Yet for necessity of present life    I must show out a flag and sign of love,    (Which is indeed but sign).   That you shall surely find him,    Lead to the Sagittary the raisèd search,    And there will I be with him. So farewell.
No cock of mine. You crow too like a craven.
Ay. Would you had never seen him!
[to ALONSO, ANTONIO, and SEBASTIAN]     You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,    That hath to instrument this lower world    And what is in t, the never-surfeited sea    Hath caused to belch up you   and on this island    Where man doth not inhabit, you mongst men    Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad,    And even with suchlike valor men hang and drown    Their proper selves.     [ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO draw their swords]     You fools, I and my fellows    Are ministers of fate.   The elements    Of whom your swords are tempered may as well    Wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs    Kill the still-closing waters as diminish    One dowl thats in my plume.   My fellow ministers    Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,    Your swords are now too massy for your strengths    And will not be uplifted. But remember    For thats my business to youthat you three    From Milan did supplant good Prospero,    Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,    Him and his innocent child.   For which foul deed    The powersdelaying, not forgettinghave    Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures,    Against your peace.   Thee of thy son, Alonso,    They have bereft, and do pronounce by me    Lingering perdition, worse than any death    Can be at once, shall step by step attend    You and your ways;   whose wraths to guard you from    Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls    Upon your headsis nothing but hearts' sorrow    And a clear life ensuing.
How came we ashore?
Tybalt here slain, whom Romeos hand did slay.    Romeo, that spoke him fair, bade him bethink    How nice the quarrel was and urged withal    Your high displeasure.   All this uttered    With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed,    Could not take truce with the unruly spleen    Of Tybalt deaf to peace,   but that he tilts    With piercing steel at bold Mercutios breast,    Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,    And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats    Cold death aside and with the other sends    It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,    Retorts it.   Romeo, he cries aloud,    Hold, friends! Friends, part! and, swifter than his tongue,    His agile arm beats down their fatal points,    And twixt them rushesunderneath whose arm    An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life    Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.    But by and by comes back to Romeo,    Who had but newly entertained revenge,    And to t they go like lightning, for ere I    Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain.    And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.    This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
The ditty does remember my drowned father.    This is no mortal business, nor no sound    That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.
Let's have some merry ones.
O, shut the door! And when thou hast done so,Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help.
Oh, me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?
Signior Lodovico?
A charitable wish and full of love.
And she is fair too, is she not?
[To MARINA]  Come your ways. My masters, you sayshe's a virgin?
Tell me not, Friar, that thou hearst of this,    Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.    If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,    Do thou but call my resolution wise,    And with this knife Ill help it presently.    [Shows him a knife]    God joined my heart and Romeos, thou our hands.    And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo sealed,    Shall be the label to another deed,    Or my true heart with treacherous revolt    Turn to another, this shall slay them both.    Therefore out of thy long-experienced time,    Give me some present counsel, or, behold,    Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife    Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that    Which the commission of thy years and art    Could to no issue of true honor bring.    Be not so long to speak. I long to die    If what thou speakst speak not of remedy.
If thou beest Trinculo, come forth. Ill pull thee by the lesser legs. If any be Trinculos legs, these are they.    [pulls TRINCULO out from under the gaberdine]      Thouart very Trinculo indeed! How camest thou to be the siege of this mooncalf? Can he vent Trinculos?
Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,    Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips:    O were the sum of these that I should pay    Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!
Heres one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Is t even so?
[as VINCENTIO]  Away, away, mad ass! His name is Lucentio and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.
Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.
How is t, brother!
What we will do, we do upon command.
Husband, lets follow to see the end of this ado.
For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shallsee a rose; and she were a rose indeed, if she had but
Honest! good fellow, what's that? If it be a dayfits you, search out of the calendar, and nobodylook after it.
Why, uncle, tis a shame.
And further he desires to know of you,Of whence you are, your name and parentage.
Amen.
See not your bride in these unreverent robes.Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
Some loving friends convey the emperor hence,    And give him burial in his father's grave:    My father and Lavinia shall forthwith    Be closed in our household's monument.    As for that heinous tiger, Tamora,    No funeral rite, nor man in mourning weeds,    No mournful bell shall ring her burial;    But throw her forth to beasts and birds of prey:    Her life was beast-like, and devoid of pity;    And, being so, shall have like want of pity.    See justice done on Aaron, that damn'd Moor,    By whom our heavy haps had their beginning:    Then, afterwards, to order well the state,    That like events may ne'er it ruinate.
Stanley, look to your wife. If she conveyLetters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.
Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?
You bid me make it orderly and well, According to the fashion and the time.
What villain, madam?
[Aside]  For all this same, Ill hide me hereabout. His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Despise me    If I do not. Three great ones of the city    (In personal suit to make me his lieutenant)    Off-capped to him, and by the faith of man    I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.    But he (as loving his own pride and purposes)    Evades them with a bombast circumstance    Horribly stuffed with epithets of war,    And in conclusion    Nonsuits my mediators.   For Certes, says he,    I have already chose my officer.    And what was he?    Forsooth, a great arithmetician,    One Michael Cassio, a Florentine    A fellow almost damned in a fair wife    That never set a squadron in the field,    Nor the division of a battle knows    More than a spinsterunless the bookish theoric,    Wherein the toged consuls can propose    As masterly as he.   Mere prattle without practice    Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th' election    And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof    At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds    Christian and heathen,   must be beleed and calmed    By debitor and creditor. This counter-caster    He (in good time) must his lieutenant be    And I, bless the mark, his Moorships ancient.
I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?
Take not, good cousin, further than you should.Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes    Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.    He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,    I am a child to chiding.
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
He lives that loves thee better than he could.
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.
[To MARINA]    Pray you, come hither awhile. You    have fortunes coming upon you.   Mark me: you must    seem to do that fearfully which you commit    willingly, despise profit where you have most gain.    To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your    lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good    opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.
And Trinculo is reeling ripe. Where should they    Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?    How camest thou in this pickle?
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.
Come on, I say, and first begin with her.
Sir, no. His indignation derives itself out of a very competent injury. Therefore get you on and give him his desire.   Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with me which with as much safety you might answer him.   Therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked, for meddle you must, thats certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
My man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack. For my part, the sea cannot drown me.   I swam, ere I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
Oh Iago!
Something from Cyprus as I may divine.    It is a business of some heat. The galleys    Have sent a dozen sequent messengers    This very night at one anothers heels,    And many of the consuls, raised and met,    Are at the Dukes already. You have been hotly called for.    When being not at your lodging to be found    The Senate hath sent about three several guests    To search you out.
Come, my Marina.
Anon!
Thou common friend, that's without faith or love,    For such is a friend now; treacherous man!    Thou hast beguiled my hopes; nought but mine eye    Could have persuaded me: now I dare not say    I have one friend alive; thou wouldst disprove me.    Who should be trusted, when one's own right hand    Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,    I am sorry I must never trust thee more,    But count the world a stranger for thy sake.    The private wound is deepest: O time most accurst,    'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
Orsino.
[aside]  Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.
In him there is a hope of government,    Which, in his nonage, council under him,    And, in his full and ripened years, himself,    No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
Why, didst thou not come from heaven?
Had it pleased heaven    To try me with affliction, had they rained    All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head,    Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,    Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,    I should have found in some place of my soul    A drop of patience.   But, alas, to make me    The fixèd figure for the time of scorn    To point his slow and moving finger at!    Yet could I bear that too, well, very well.    But there where I have garnered up my heart,    Where either I must live or bear no life,    The fountain from the which my current runs    Or else dries upto be discarded thence!    Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads    To knot and gender in!   Turn thy complexion there,    Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,    Ay, there, look grim as hell!
[To BAPTISTA]  I pray you, sir, is it your willTo make a stale of me amongst these mates?
Come, gentlemen,Let us consult upon tomorrows businessInto my tent. The dew is raw and cold.
Princes, it is too late to talk of love;    And that's the mark I know you level at:    Therefore each one betake him to his rest;    To-morrow all for speeding do their best.
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.
Very well, go to! I cannot go to, man, nor tis not very well. Nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible
[aside to SEBASTIAN]  I am right glad that hes so out of hope.Do not, for one repulse, forego the purposeThat you resolved t' effect.
If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness. If thou beest a devil, take t as thou list.
Why, this was molded on a porringer!    A velvet dish! Fie, fie, tis lewd and filthy!    Why, tis a cockle or a walnut shell,    A knack, a toy, a trick, a babys cap.    Away with it! Come, let me have a bigger.
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to    rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear    open.   He was torn to pieces with a bear: this    avouches the shepherd's son;   who has not only his    innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a    handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.
O that ever I was born!
What is thy name?   and wherefore comest thou hither,    Before King Richard in his royal lists?    Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel?    Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
Go, sirrah, take them to the butteryAnd give them friendly welcome every one. Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yellAs when, by night and negligence, the fireIs spied in populous cities.
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
The old cock.
By break of day, if the wind cease.
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,    Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other    Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom.    If any wretch have put this in your head    Let heaven requite it with the serpents curse    For if she be not honest, chaste, and true    Theres no man happy. The purest of their wives    Is foul as slander.
My lords, with all the humbleness I may,    I greet your honours from Andronicus.     [Aside]       And pray the Roman gods confound you both!
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.
Well, girl, thou weepst not so much for his death,As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
That were hard to compass,Because she will admit no kind of suit,No, not the dukes.
There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,    Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard;    And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour;    None else of name and noble estimate.
The woe's to come; the children yet unborn.Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
Hark!
Is not this he?
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio.  [To  TRANIO  as  LUCENTIO  ]  But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger. May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
'Tis better, sir, to be brief than tedious.Let him seeour commission, and talk no more.
You look as if you held a brow of much distractionAre you moved, my lord?
I do not always follow lover, elder brother andwoman; sometime the philosopher.
This is the monkeys own giving out. She is persuaded Iwill marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.
Oh, yes, and went between us very oft.
Help, mistress, help! My master is mad.
Grace to boot!    Of this make no conclusion, lest you say    Your queen and I are devils:   yet go on;    The offences we have made you do we'll answer,    If you first sinn'd with us and that with us    You did continue fault and that you slipp'd not    With any but with us.
If thou dost I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly gentleman!
Is it true too, think you?
What was his reason?He was not so resolved when last we spake together.
Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed!
Look in upon me then and speak with me, Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
Fear me not.
Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning    To raze one title of your honour out:    To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,    From the most gracious regent of this land,    The Duke of York,   to know what pricks you on    To take advantage of the absent time    And fright our native peace with self-born arms.
[From within]  Madam!
No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you. I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.
[To PETRUCHIO]  You are too blunt. Go to it orderly.
I promised we would be contributorsAnd bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
Slave!
You cannot make gross sins look clear:To revenge is no valour, but to bear.
Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answerthee profitably.
Master, for my hand,Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Lady, you know no rules of charity,Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.
We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore,A portly sail of ships make hitherward.
Calls my lord?
Do you quarrel, sir?
Where are they?
Where is he?
What say you to a neats foot?
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moor, butfor bragging and telling her fantastical lies. To love him still for prating?   Let not thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed, and what delight shall she haveto look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be a game to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, manners and beauties.   All which the Moor is defective in. Now for want of these required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will finditself abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor. Very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some second choice.     Now sir, this grantedas it is a most pregnant and unforced positionwho stands so eminent in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble, no furtherconscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most hidden loose affection.   Why, none, why, none! A slipper and subtle knave, a finder of occasions that has an eye, can stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself. A devilish knave.   Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. A pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.
Good fool, help me to some light and some paper. I tellthee, I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed.    And therefore, setting all this chat aside,    Thus in plain terms:   your father hath consented    That you shall be my wife, your dowry 'greed on,    And, will you, nill you, I will marry you.    Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn,    For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,    Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,    Thou must be married to no man but me.    For I am he am born to tame you, Kate,    And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate    Conformable as other household Kates.
No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court,    Broken his staff of office and dispersed    The household of the king.
Nay, I will give thee a kiss.  [kisses him]  Now pray thee, love, stay.
Were I like thee, I'ld throw away myself.
What horrible fancys this?
[reads]  Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for t.
O me unhappy!
The pox on such antic, lisping, affecting fantasmines, these new tuners of accents! By Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good whore!   Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardon mes,   who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the oldbench? Oh, their bones, their bones!
All three of them are desperate. Their great guilt,    Like poison given to work a great time after,    Now 'gins to bite the spirits.   I do beseech you    That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly    And hinder them from what this ecstasy    May now provoke them to.
[To OLIVIA]   So comes it, lady, you have been mistook.    But nature to her bias drew in that.    You would have been contracted to a maid;    Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived.    You are betrothed both to a maid and man.
Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
May we see them?
Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
I cannot tell. But I had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross every morning.
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.
Oh, blood, blood, blood!
Stay, madam. I must talk a word with you.
Nay, thats certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
Come, come, you're drunk.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?Turn thee, Benvolio. Look upon thy death.
One Varro's servant, my good lord,
I will not charm my tongue, I am bound to speak.My mistress here lies murdered in her bed
True.    And look how well my garments sit upon me,    Much feater than before.   My brothers servants    Were then my fellows. Now they are my men.
How now! What do you here alone?
You say you do not know the ladys mind. Uneven is the course. I like it not.
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
No, unpin me here.This Lodovico is a proper man.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady
Because the girl should not survive her shame,And by her presence still renew his sorrows.
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would    not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am    courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means    to do the prince my master good;   which who knows how    that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring    these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him:   if he    think it fit to shore them again and that the    complaint they have to the king concerns him    nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far    officious; for I am proof against that title and    what shame else belongs to't.   To him will I present    them: there may be matter in it.
Alive in triumphand Mercutio slain!    Away to heaven, respective lenity,    And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.    Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again    That late thou gavest me, for Mercutios soul    Is but a little way above our heads,    Staying for thine to keep him company.    Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Truly, I think they are.
[as LUCENTIO]  No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two, The one as famous for a scolding tongueAs is the other for beauteous modesty.
And how does that honourable, complete, free-heartedgentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lordand master?
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest    Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.    A greater power than we can contradict    Hath thwarted our intents.   Come, come away.    Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,    And Paris too. Come, Ill dispose of thee    Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.    Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.    Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
'Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir; which, in my    lord's behalf, I come to entreat your honour to    supply;   who, having great and instant occasion to    use fifty talents, hath sent to your lordship to    furnish him, nothing doubting your present    assistance therein.
Is all things ready for the royal time?
Hear a little further    And then Ill bring thee to the present business    Which now s upon s,   without the which this story    Were most impertinent.
You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than adinner of friends.
Let her have your voice.    Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not    To please the palate of my appetite,    Nor to comply with heat the young affects    In my defunct and proper satisfaction,    But to be free and bounteous to her mind,    And heaven defend your good souls, that you think    I will your serious and great business scant    When she is with me.   No, when light-winged toys    Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness    My speculative and officed instrument,    That my disports corrupt and taint my business,    Let housewives make a skillet of my helm    And all indign and base adversities    Make head against my estimation.
Madam, and nothing else. So lords call ladies.
O, do not swear!Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
In Gods name, what art thou?
Ha! now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master.
Art thou my son?
What, not to pray?
What, I say?    My foot my tutor?   Put thy sword up, traitor,    Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience    Is so possessed with guilt.   Come from thy ward,    For I can here disarm thee with this stick    And make thy weapon drop.
How now, good Cassio, whats the news with you?
And I, most jocund, apt, and willingly,To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
Get fire and meat for these poor men:'T has been a turbulent and stormy night.
[as LUCENTIO]  Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio.
And did they so?
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
Unmannered dog, stand thou when I command!    Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,    Or by Saint Paul Ill strike thee to my foot    And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,And then pursue me as you draw your bow.You are welcome all.
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
O Paulina,    We honour you with trouble:   but we came    To see the statue of our queen: your gallery    Have we pass'd through, not without much content    In many singularities;   but we saw not    That which my daughter came to look upon,    The statue of her mother.
Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?    These tidings nip me, and I hang the head    As flowers with frost or grass beat down with storms:    Ay, now begin our sorrows to approach:    'Tis he the common people love so much;    Myself hath often over-heard them say,    When I have walked like a private man,    That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,    And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor.
And what of him, Tranio?
Oh, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,    That quicken even with blowing.   O thou weed,    Who art so lovely fair and smellst so sweet    That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!
Well, I will go;But yet I have no desire to it.
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.
One from the Lord Stanley.
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.    Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have    A dram of poison,   such soon-speeding gear    As will disperse itself through all the veins    That the life-weary taker may fall dead,    And that the trunk may be discharged of breath    As violently as hasty powder fired    Doth hurry from the fatal cannons womb.
I humbly thank your ladyship.
Will I live?
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself to mar.
Bounteous madam,Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,Hes never anything but your true servant.
Tush, Gremio. Though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellowsin the world,   an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.
This is, to give a dog and in recompense desire my dogagain.
Here's my lord.
Alas!
O serpent heart hid with a flowering face!    Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?    Beautiful tyrant! Fiend angelical!    Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!    Despisèd substance of divinest show,    Just opposite to what thou justly seemst.    A damnèd saint, an honorable villain!    O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell    When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend    In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?    Was ever book containing such vile matter    So fairly bound? Oh, that deceit should dwell    In such a gorgeous palace!
What dost thou say?
And here I take the like unfeignèd oathNever to marry with her, though she would entreat.Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!
I would your duty were as foolish too.The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,Hath cost me an hundred crowns since suppertime.
Let him be the devil, an he will, I care not. Give me faith, say I. Well, its all one.
Cold friends to me. What do they in the northWhen they should serve their sovereign in the west?
Let him do his spite.    My services which I have done the signiory    Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know    Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,    I shall promulgate.   I fetch my life and being    From men of royal siege, and my demerits    May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune    As this that I have reached.   For know, Iago,    But that I love the gentle Desdemona,    I would not my unhousèd free condition    Put into circumscription and confine    For the seas worth. But look, what lights come yond?
Why, I said nothing.
Your napkin is too little,Let it alone.
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
Tut, duns the mouse, the constables own word.    If thou art dun, well draw thee from the mire,    Orsave your reverencelove, wherein thou stickst    Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
O Romeo, Romeo! Wherefore art thou Romeo?    Deny thy father and refuse thy name.    Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,    And Ill no longer be a Capulet.
Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valor. Challenge me the counts youth to fight with him.   Hurt him in eleven places. My niece shall take note of it,   and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in mans commendation with woman than report of valor.
I thank thee. Thou shalt not lose by it.
My business, sir, is to the king.
Before the time be out? No more!
Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. Oh, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.
Prithee, be not sad,Thou art true and honest; ingeniously I speak.No blame belongs to thee.
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
But that the poor monsters in drink. An abominable monster!
Prithee, speak:    Falseness cannot come from thee; for thou look'st    Modest as Justice, and thou seem'st a palace    For the crown'd Truth to dwell in:   I will    believe thee,    And make my senses credit thy relation    To points that seem impossible; for thou look'st    Like one I loved indeed.   What were thy friends?    Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back    Which was when I perceived thee   that thou camest    From good descending?
How have you made division of yourself?    An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin    Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Nay, an thou pass upon me, Ill no more with thee. Hold, theres expenses for thee.
Why, how now, Juliet?
I do assure you, tis against my will.
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer.   Drunk? And speak parrot?   And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse fustian with ones own shadow? O thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil!
I am not merry, but I do beguileThe thing I am by seeming otherwise.Come, how wouldst thou praise me?
You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.
Which shows that beauty hath his power and will,Which can as well inflame as it can kill.
As plain as I see you now.
No, precious creature.    I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,    Than you should such dishonor undergo    While I sit lazy by.
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile? Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Come, knock and enter. And no sooner inBut every man betake him to his legs.
Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!Ill make thee an example.
Be a whore still: they love thee not that use thee;    Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.    Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves    For tubs and baths; bring down rose-cheeked youth    To the tub-fast and the diet.
The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord,    Makes me most forward in this princely presence    To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be.    I say, my lord, they have deservèd death.
Please you, my lord, there are certainladies most desirous of admittance.
Hang thee, young baggage! Disobedient wretch!    I tell thee what: get thee to church o Thursday,    Or never after look me in the face.    Speak not. Reply not. Do not answer me.    My fingers itch.Wife, we scarce thought us blest    That God had lent us but this only child,    But now I see this one is one too much    And that we have a curse in having her.    Out on her, hilding!
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.    Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes    Whom envy hath immured within your walls    Rough cradle for such little pretty ones.    Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow    For tender princes, use my babies well.    So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.
(sings) Alas, why is she so?
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
His princess, say you, with him?
Ready for his friends.
All things that we ordained festival    Turn from their office to black funeral.    Our instruments to melancholy bells,    Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast.    Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,    Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,    And all things change them to the contrary.
Out.
A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear;    No light, no fire: the unfriendly elements    Forgot thee utterly:   nor have I time    To give thee hallow'd to thy grave, but straight    Must cast thee, scarcely coffin'd, in the ooze;    Where, for a monument upon thy bones,    And e'er-remaining lamps, the belching whale    And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse,    Lying with simple shells.   O Lychorida,    Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink and paper,    My casket and my jewels;   and bid Nicander    Bring me the satin coffer:   lay the babe    Upon the pillow: hie thee, whiles I say    A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.
I am glad on t. 'Tis a worthy governor.
Why Hearts ease?
An if your highness knew my heart, you were.    My lord the emperor, resolve me this:    Was it well done of rash Virginius    To slay his daughter with his own right hand,    Because she was enforced, stain'd, and deflower'd?
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,    For beauty, starved with her severity,    Cuts beauty off from all posterity.    She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,    To merit bliss by making me despair.    She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow    Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
I do beseech you, sir, have patience.Your looks are pale and wild, and do importSome misadventure.
Thou art a fool. If Echo were as fleet,    I would esteem him worth a dozen such.    But sup them well and look unto them all.    Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
What's here? A scroll; and written round about?    Let's see;     [Reads]     'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,    Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu.'
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; neverSaw I men scour so on their way: I eyed themEven to their ships.
News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come.Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters?Shall I have justice? what says Jupiter?
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrongFor the whole world.
Marry, to
I do not doubt thy faith;But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
[to MIRANDA]  This is strange. Your fathers in some passionThat works him strongly.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?
Are they not Athenians?
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king    Should so with civil and uncivil arms    Be rush'd upon!   Thy thrice noble cousin    Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;    And by the honourable tomb he swears,    That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,    And by the royalties of both your bloods,    Currents that spring from one most gracious head,    And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,    And by the worth and honour of himself,    Comprising all that may be sworn or said,    His coming hither hath no further scope    Than for his lineal royalties and to beg    Enfranchisement immediate on his knees:    Which on thy royal party granted once,    His glittering arms he will commend to rust,    His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart    To faithful service of your majesty.    This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;    And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.
I'll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while:Pray, walk softly, do not heat your blood:What! I must have a care of you.
Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told thee often, and I re-tell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is hearted. Thine hath no less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him.   If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, mea sport. There are many events in the womb of time which will be delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more of this tomorrow. Adieu.
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now thesky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrusta bodkin's point.
This fellows of exceeding honesty    And knows all quantities, with a learnèd spirit,    Of human dealings.   If I do prove her haggard,    Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,    Id whistle her off and let her down the wind    To prey at fortune.   Haply, for I am black    And have not those soft parts of conversation    That chamberers have, or for I am declined    Into the vale of yearsyet thats not much    Shes gone, I am abused, and my relief    Must be to loathe her. Oh, curse of marriage    That we can call these delicate creatures ours    And not their appetites!   I had rather be a toad    And live upon the vapor of a dungeon    Than keep a corner in the thing I love    For others' uses.   Yet tis the plague to great ones,    Prerogatived are they less than the base.    'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death.    Even then this forkèd plague is fated to us    When we do quicken. Look where she comes.
I would not be a stander-by to hear    My sovereign mistress clouded so, without    My present vengeance taken:   'shrew my heart,    You never spoke what did become you less    Than this; which to reiterate were sin    As deep as that, though true.
Sir, sir, the firsts for me; let her go by.
O my good lord, the world is but a word:Were it all yours to give it in a breath,How quickly were it gone!
And what to?
But are you flesh and blood?    Have you a working pulse? and are no fairy?    Motion! Well; speak on. Where were you born?    And wherefore call'd Marina?
Lord Timon's mad.
I warrant something from Venice. 'Tis Lodovico, this, comes from the duke. See, your wifes with him.
Rarest sounds! Do ye not hear?
What says our general?
Why, what need we    Commune with you of this, but rather follow    Our forceful instigation?   Our prerogative    Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness    Imparts this;   which if you, or stupefied    Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not    Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves    We need no more of your advice:   the matter,    The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all    Properly ours.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,    And every day I cannot come to woo.    You knew my father well, and in him me,    Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,    Which I have bettered rather than decreased.    Then tell me, if I get your daughters love,    What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
Why then, the mustard without the beef.
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatched. How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my handsOf this most grievous murder.
She embraces him.
Antonio, O my dear Antonio!How have the hours racked and tortured meSince I have lost thee!
O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day!    Most lamentable day, most woeful day    That ever, ever, I did yet behold!    O day, O day, O day, O hateful day!    Never was seen so black a day as this.    O woeful day, O woeful day!
A knight of Sparta, my renowned father;    And the device he bears upon his shield    Is a black Ethiope reaching at the sun    The word, 'Lux tua vita mihi.'
From him I come    With message unto princely Pericles;    But since my landing I have understood    Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels,    My message must return from whence it came.
Then I lie not.
On what occasion God He knows, not I,    The Queen your mother and your brother York    Have taken sanctuary.   The tender prince    Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,    But by his mother was perforce withheld.
Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid    That paragons description and wild fame,    One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,    And in th' essential vesture of creation    Does tire the ingener.
Oh, monstrous act!
Having been three months married to her, sitting in my state
The noble duke hath been too much abused.
What, was she ravish'd? tell who did the deed.
Your reason, mighty lord?
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
If I do so, it will be of more priceBeing spoke behind your back than to your face.
Face not me. Thou hast braved many men; brave not me. Iwill neither be faced nor braved. I say unto thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown, but I did not bid him cut it to pieces.  Ergo,  thou liest.
With adorations, fertile tears, With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Go then and muster men, but leave behindYour son George Stanley. Look your heart be firm. Or else his heads assurance is but frail.
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet. The meat was well, if you were so contented.
Upon record, my gracious lord.
I would I were thy bird.
O, that's as much as you would be deniedOf your fair courtesy.
Is she not passing fair?
Know, then, it is your fault that you resign    The supreme seat, the throne majestical,    The sceptered office of your ancestors,    Your state of fortune, and your due of birth,    The lineal glory of your royal house,    To the corruption of a blemished stock,    Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,    Which here we waken to our countrys good,    The noble isle doth want her proper limbs    Her face defaced with scars of infamy,    Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,    And almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf    Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion;    Which to recure, we heartily solicit    Your gracious self to take on you the charge    And kingly government of this your land,    Not as Protector, steward, substitute,    Or lowly factor for anothers gain,    But as successively, from blood to blood,    Your right of birth, your empery, your own.    For this, consorted with the citizens,    Your very worshipful and loving friends,    And by their vehement instigation,    In this just suit come I to move your Grace.
Why should you fear? is not your city strong?
Be not afeard. The isle is full of noises,    Sounds, and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not.    Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments    Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices    That, if I then had waked after long sleep,    Will make me sleep again.   And then, in dreaming,    The clouds methought would open and show riches    Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked    I cried to dream again.
We follow thee.Juliet, the county stays.
Or o' mine either?
What, master, read you? First resolve me that.
Now fair befall you! He deserved his death,    And your good Graces both have well proceeded    To warn false traitors from the like attempts.  I never looked for better at his handsAfter he once fell in with Mrs Shore.
What, talking with a priest, Lord Chamberlain?Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest; Your Honor hath no shriving work in hand.
Ay, ay. I care not for good life.
Doth your lordship call?
Come on, come on. Where is your boar-spear, man? Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,Nor shall not, whilst tis in my custody.
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all    That of his bounties taste! The five best senses    Acknowledge thee their patron; and come freely    To gratulate thy plenteous bosom:   th' ear,    Taste, touch and smell, pleased from thy tale rise;    They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
I'll do't, my lord.
Come, come, Lavinia; look, thy foes are bound.    Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me;    But let them hear what fearful words I utter.    O villains, Chiron and Demetrius!    Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud,    This goodly summer with your winter mix'd.    You kill'd her husband, and for that vile fault    Two of her brothers were condemn'd to death,    My hand cut off and made a merry jest;    Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear    Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity,    Inhuman traitors, you constrain'd and forced.    What would you say, if I should let you speak?    Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.    Hark, wretches! how I mean to martyr you.    This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,    Whilst that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold    The basin that receives your guilty blood.    You know your mother means to feast with me,    And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad:    Hark, villains! I will grind your bones to dust    And with your blood and it I'll make a paste,    And of the paste a coffin I will rear    And make two pasties of your shameful heads,    And bid that strumpet, your unhallow'd dam,    Like to the earth swallow her own increase.    This is the feast that I have bid her to,    And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;    For worse than Philomel you used my daughter,    And worse than Progne I will be revenged:    And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come,
Sir, the year growing ancient,    Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth    Of trembling winter,   the fairest    flowers o' the season    Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,    Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind    Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not    To get slips of them.
Zounds!
In faith, I will.Let me peruse this face.    Mercutios kinsman, noble County Paris.    What said my man, when my betossèd soul    Did not attend him as we rode? I think    He told me Paris should have married Juliet.    Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?    Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,    To think it was so?   O, give me thy hand,    One writ with me in sour misfortunes book.    Ill bury thee in a triumphant grave.    [ROMEO opens the tomb to reveal JULIET inside]    A grave? Oh, no. A lantern, slaughtered youth,    For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes    This vault a feasting presence full of light.    Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.    [Lays PARIS in the tomb]    How oft when men are at the point of death    Have they been merry, which their keepers call    A lightning before death! Oh, how may I    Call this a lightning?O my love, my wife!    Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,    Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.    Thou art not conquered.   Beautys ensign yet    Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,    And deaths pale flag is not advancèd there.    Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?    O, what more favor can I do to thee,    Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain    To sunder his that was thine enemy?    Forgive me, cousin.   Ah, dear Juliet,    Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe    That unsubstantial death is amorous,    And that the lean abhorrèd monster keeps    Thee here in dark to be his paramour?    For fear of that, I still will stay with thee,    And never from this palace of dim night    Depart again. Here, here will I remain    With worms that are thy chamber maids.   Oh, here    Will I set up my everlasting rest,    And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars    From this world-wearied flesh.   Eyes, look your last.    Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O you    The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss    A dateless bargain to engrossing death.    [Kisses JULIET, takes out the poison]    Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide.    Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on    The dashing rocks thy seasick, weary bark.    Heres to my love!   [Drinks the poison]   O true apothecary,    Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two,But then up farther, and as far as Rome,And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
An you part so, mistress, I would I might never draw sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?
Thanks, gentle uncle.   Come, lords, away.    To fight with Glendower and his complices:    Awhile to work, and after holiday.
Farewell, farewell. One kiss, and Ill descend.
What would she find? Lavinia, shall I read?    This is the tragic tale of Philomel,    And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape:    And rape, I fear, was root of thine annoy.
See how belief may suffer by foul show!    This borrow'd passion stands for true old woe;    And Pericles, in sorrow all devour'd,    With sighs shot through, and biggest tears o'ershower'd,    Leaves Tarsus and again embarks.    He swears    Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs:    He puts on sackcloth, and to sea.   He bears    A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears,    And yet he rides it out.   Now please you wit.    The epitaph is for Marina writ By wicked Dionyza.     [Reads the inscription on MARINA's monument]      'The fairest, sweet'st, and best lies here,    Who wither'd in her spring of year.    She was of Tyrus the king's daughter,    On whom foul death hath made this slaughter;    Marina was she call'd; and at her birth,    Thetis, being proud, swallow'd some part o' the earth:    Therefore the earth, fearing to be o'erflow'd,    Hath Thetis' birth-child on the heavens bestow'd:    Wherefore she does, and swears she'll never stint,    Make raging battery upon shores of flint.'    No visor does become black villany    So well as soft and tender flattery.    Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead,    And bear his courses to be ordered    By Lady Fortune;   while our scene must play    His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-dayIn her unholy service.    Patience, then,    And think you now are all in Mytilene.
That by degrees we mean to look into    And watch our vantage in this business.    Well overreach the graybeard, Gremio,    The narrow-prying father, Minola,    The quaint musician, amorous Litio,    All for my masters sake, Lucentio.
No marrying mong his subjects?
Fie, no, do not believe it; he cannot want for money.
As we do turn our backs    From our companion thrown into his grave,    So his familiars to his buried fortunes    Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,    Like empty purses pick'd;   and his poor self,    A dedicated beggar to the air,    With his disease of all-shunn'd poverty,    Walks, like contempt, alone. More of our fellows.
I will have none on t. We shall lose our time,And all be turned to barnacles or to apesWith foreheads villainous low.
It is against my heart.
Send for money, knight. If thou hast her not i' the end, call me Cut.
If Timon stay at home. You three serve three usurers?
Yes, sir, I have indeed.
You cram these words into mine ears against    The stomach of my sense. Would I had never    Married my daughter there!   For, coming thence,    My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,    Who is so far from Italy removed    I ne'er again shall see her.   O thou mine heir    Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish    Hath made his meal on thee?
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.    Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?    What is become of Bushy? where is Green?    That they have let the dangerous enemy    Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?    If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:    I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.
By my head, here comes the Capulets.
An if I do not, may my hands rot offAnd never brandish more revengeful steelOver the glittering helmet of my foe!
Here lies my gown.
Oh, I have read it. It is heresy. Have you no more to say?
'Tis true, most worthy signior.The Dukes in council and your noble self,I am sure, is sent for.
O you gods!    Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?    Full of decay and failing? O monument    And wonder of good deeds evilly bestow'd!    What an alteration of honour    Has desperate want made!    What viler thing upon the earth than friends    Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!    How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,    When man was wish'd to love his enemies!    Grant I may ever love, and rather woo    Those that would mischief me than those that do!    Has caught me in his eye: I will present    My honest grief unto him; and, as my lord,    Still serve him with my life. My dearest master!
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not. He would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
If to have done the thing you gave in chargeBeget your happiness, be happy then,For it is done.
Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy    To stand upon my kingdom once again.    Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,    Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs:    As a long-parted mother with her child    Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,    So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,    And do thee favours with my royal hands.    Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,    Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;    But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,    And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,    Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet    Which with usurping steps do trample thee:    Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;    And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,    Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder    Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch    Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.    Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:    This earth shall have a feeling and these stones    Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king    Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
I think thou dost.    And for I know thou 'rt full of love and honesty    And weighst thy words before thou givst them breath,    Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more.    For such things in a false disloyal knave    Are tricks of custom, but in a man thats just    They are close dilations, working from the heart,    That passion cannot rule.
Lechery! I defy lechery. Theres one at the gate.
I shall not need transport my words by you;Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne    Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.    By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty    With those gross taunts that oft I have endured.    I had rather be a country servant-maid    Than a great queen with this condition,    To be so baited, scorned, and stormèd at.
Here; I will mend thy feast.
Hark you, my friend; you said you could not beg.
I should have been a sore one then.
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.
[to RICHARD]   Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fearLet fall thy lance. Despair, and die!
Why, are all your beggars whipped, then?
My dear Othello!
Show me a villain that hath done a rape,And I am sent to be revenged on him.
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel,    And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?    O, but remember this another day,    When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,    And say poor Margaret was a prophetess.    Live each of you the subjects to his hate,    And he to yours, and all of you to Gods.
Where left we last?
Richard!
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
I humbly take my leave.
I thought all for the best.
Ah, for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
'Tis death for anyone in Mantua    To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?    Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke,    For private quarrel twixt your duke and him,    Hath published and proclaimed it openly.    'Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come,    You might have heard it else proclaimed about.
Hang him, jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
Your grace mistakes; only to be briefLeft I his title out.
I shall be reconciled to him again.
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate    With thy most operant poison! What is here?    Gold? yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, gods,    I am no idle votarist:   roots, you clear heavens!    Thus much of this will make black white, foul fair,    Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.    Ha, you gods! why this?   what this, you gods? Why, this    Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,    Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads:    This yellow slave    Will knit and break religions, bless the accursed,    Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves    And give them title, knee and approbation    With senators on the bench:   this is it    That makes the wappen'd widow wed again;    She, whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores    Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices    To the April day again.   Come, damned earth,    Thou common whore of mankind, that put'st odds    Among the route of nations, I will make thee    Do thy right nature.
Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,    To chide my fortune and torment myself?    Ill join with black despair against my soul    And to myself become an enemy.
[as LUCENTIO]  Curster than she? Why, tis impossible.
So they are.    My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.    My fathers loss, the weakness which I feel,    The wrack of all my friends, nor this mans threats,    To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,    Might I but through my prison once a day    Behold this maid.   All corners else o' th' earth    Let liberty make use of. Space enough    Have I in such a prison.
Unclasp, unclasp:    Thanks, gentlemen, to all; all have done well.    [  To PERICLES]     But you the best.   Pages and lights, to conduct    These knights unto their several lodgings!    Yours, sir,    We have given order to be next our own.
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.    Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me.    Because that I am little, like an ape,    He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Oh, that record is lively in my soul! He finished indeed his mortal actThat day that made my sister thirteen years.
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy,   as a squash is before tis a peascod, or a codling when tis almost an apple.   'Tis with him in standing water, between boy and man.   He is very well-favored, andhe speaks very shrewishly.   One would think his mothersmilk were scarce out of him.
I could render one.
Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness.   Thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow ofthy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well.
Always a villain's office or a fool's.Dost please thyself in't?
Come hither, you rogue! What, have you forgot me?
The best news is that we have safely found    Our king and company. The next, our ship    Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split    Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when    We first put out to sea.
Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men thatwere cast away before us even now.
[picking up the letter]  By my life, this is my ladys hand these be her very Cs, her Us and her Ts and thusmakes she her great Ps.  It is, in contempt of question, her hand.
Never, my lord.
O, but, sir,    Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis    Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:    One of these two must be necessities,    Which then will speak, that you must    change this purpose,    Or I my life.
Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty aproportion to live quietly, and so give over.
Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond,And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen,Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
Did ever Dian so become a grove    As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?    Oh, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,    And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful.
[as LUCENTIO]  O despiteful love! Unconstant womankind! I tell thee, Litio, this is wonderful!
Good.
Excellent! Your lordship's a goodly villain. The    devil knew not what he did when he made man    politic; he crossed himself by 't: and I cannot    think but, in the end, the villainies of man will    set him clear.   How fairly this lord strives to    appear foul! takes virtuous copies to be wicked,    like those that under hot ardent zeal would set    whole realms on fire: Of such a nature is his    politic love.    This was my lord's best hope; now all are fled,    Save only the gods: now his friends are dead,    Doors, that were ne'er acquainted with their wards    Many a bounteous year must be employ'd    Now to guard sure their master.    And this is all a liberal course allows;    Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.
(as    LUCENTIO    )    Then go with me to make the matter good.    This, by the way, I let you understand:    My father is here looked for every day    To pass assurance of a dower in marriage    'Twixt me and one Baptistas daughter here.    In all these circumstances Ill instruct you.    Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
To supper; to our house.
These banish'd men that I have kept withal    Are men endued with worthy qualities:    Forgive them what they have committed here    And let them be recall'd from their exile:    They are reformed, civil, full of good    And fit for great employment, worthy lord.
He'll spare none.
What means that trump?
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,But to the next highway, and there I left him.
What sense had I in her stol'n hours of lust?    I saw t not, thought it not, it harmed not me.    I slept the next night well, fed well, was free and merry.    I found not Cassios kisses on her lips.    He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n,    Let him not knowt, and hes not robbed at all.
What noise is here?
The gods preserve ye!
Not well.
Why, what did I? I did nothing. Ill go farther off.
So would not I. My love doth so approve him    That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns    Prithee, unpin mehave grace and favor.
That he was never trainèd up in arms.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.
To do that office of thine own good willWhich tired majesty did make thee offer,The resignation of thy state and crownTo Henry Bolingbroke.
Why, sweet Othello
So said, so done, is well.Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
Sir, I will tell you;Since I am charged in honour and by himThat I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,Which must be even as swiftly follow'd asI mean to utter it, or both yourself and meCry lost, and so good night!
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,Are you so fond of your young prince as weDo seem to be of ours?
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in t.
Ah, Desdemona, away, away, away!
So thou apprehendest it: take it for thy labour.
Help, help, help! Heres a madman will murder me.
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say youhave none.
O comfortable Friar! Where is my lord?    I do remember well where I should be,    And there I am.   Where is my Romeo?
Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood.I cannot twixt the heaven and the mainDescry a sail.
You look wearily.
What is your crest? A coxcomb?
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes    God save the mark!here on his manly breast.    A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse.    Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,    All in gore blood. I swoonèd at the sight.
She may, Lord Rivers. Why, who knows not so?    She may do more, sir, than denying that.    She may help you to many fair preferments    And then deny her aiding hand therein,    And lay those honors on your high desert.    What may she not? She may, ay, marry, may she
Much!
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near    Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.    Come, I have learned that fearful commenting    Is leaden servitor to dull delay;    Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary;    Then fiery expedition be my wing,    Joves Mercury, and herald for a king.    Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield.    We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
Ay, sir; and he deserves so to be called for hispeaceable reign and good government.
She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?
Amen.
My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world    Since lowly feigning was calld compliment.    Youre servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
[aside]    The Duke of Milan    And his more braver daughter could control thee    If now twere fit to do t!   At the first sight    They have changed eyes.     Delicate Ariel,    Ill set thee free for this.     [to FERDINAND]     A word, good sir.    I fear you have done yourself some wrong. A word.
Look round about the wicked streets of Rome;    And when thou find'st a man that's like thyself.    Good Murder, stab him; he's a murderer.    Go thou with him; and when it is thy hap    To find another that is like to thee,    Good Rapine, stab him; he's a ravisher.    Go thou with them; and in the emperor's court    There is a queen, attended by a Moor;    Well mayst thou know her by thy own proportion,    for up and down she doth resemble thee:    I pray thee, do on them some violent death;    They have been violent to me and mine.
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,A villain that is hither come in spiteTo scorn at our solemnity this night.
Knock me down with 'em: cleave me to the girdle.
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my    father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and    called me brother;   and then the two kings called my    father brother; and then the prince my brother and    the princess my sister called my father father;   and    so we wept,   and there was the first gentleman-like    tears that ever we shed.
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
Thyself is self-misused.
'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,All of companionship.
Mine, fifty talents.
Touch me not so near.    I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth    Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio.    Yet I persuade myself to speak the truth    Shall nothing wrong him. This it is, general:    Montano and myself being in speech,    There comes a fellow crying out for help    And Cassio following him with determined sword    To execute upon him.   Sir, this gentleman    Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause,    Myself the crying fellow did pursue,    Lest by his clamoras it so fell out    The town might fall in fright.   He, swift of foot,    Outran my purpose, and I returned then rather    For that I heard the clink and fall of swords    And Cassio high in oath,   which till tonight    I ne'er might say before. When I came back    For this was brief I found them close together    At blow and thrust,   even as again they were    When you yourself did part them.    More of this matter cannot I report.    But men are men, the best sometimes forget.    Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,    As men in rage strike those that wish them best,    Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received    From him that fled some strange indignity    Which patience could not pass.
Ill deliver all,    And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales,    And sail so expeditious that shall catch    Your royal fleet far off.    [aside to ARIEL]    My Ariel, chick,    That is thy charge. Then to the elements    Be free, and fare thou well!   Please you, draw near.
Then never man was man true.
That defense thou hast, betake thee to t   . Of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not, but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends thee at the orchard end.   Dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skillful and deadly.
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?
[Aside]  But love will not be spurr'd to whatit loathes.
Ay, is t, I warrant him. Do but read.
Katherine the curst!A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
What, not a whore?
God bless your Grace! We see it and will say it.
Good honest men! Thou draw'st a counterfeitBest in all Athens: thou'rt, indeed, the best;Thou counterfeit'st most lively.
Come, bustle, bustle. Caparison my horse.    Call up Lord Stanley; bid him bring his power.    I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,    And thus my battle shall be orderèd:    My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,    Consisting equally of horse and foot;    Our archers shall be placèd in the midst.    John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,    Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.    They thus directed, we will follow    In the main battle, whose puissance on either side    Shall be well wingèd with our chiefest horse.    This, and Saint George to bootWhat thinkst thou, Norfolk?
Would I mightBut ever see that man!
If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.
'Tis well I am found by you.I will but spend a word here in the houseAnd go with you.
Most worthy madam,    Your honour and your goodness is so evident    That your free undertaking cannot miss    A thriving issue:   there is no lady living    So meet for this great errand.   Please your ladyship    To visit the next room, I'll presently    Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;    Who but to-day hammer'd of this design,    But durst not tempt a minister of honour,    Lest she should be denied.
Evermore weeping for your cousins death?    What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?    An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.    Therefore, have done. Some grief shows much of love,    But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?
Your actions are my dreams;    You had a bastard by Polixenes,    And I but dream'd it.   As you were past all shame,    Those of your fact are soso past all truth:    Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as    Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,    No father owning it,   which is, indeed,    More criminal in thee than it,so thou    Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage    Look for no less than death.
Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.
Set 't down, let's look upon't.
Love me or love me not, I like the cap, And it I will have, or I will have none.
Proceed.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
[To the Fool]  Why, how now, captain! what do youin this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus?
Catesby, fly to the duke.
How! Let me see:Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
[as LUCENTIO]  Thou'rt a tall fellow. Hold thee that to drink.  Gives money
(aside)    I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense,    And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio    Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,    Every way makes my gain.   Live Roderigo,    He calls me to a restitution large    Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him    As gifts to Desdemona.    It must not be. If Cassio do remain    He hath a daily beauty in his life    That makes me ugly.   And besides, the Moor    May unfold me to himthere stand I in much peril.    No, he must die. But so, I hear him coming.
Monster, lay to your fingers. Help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is, or Ill turn you out of mykingdom. Go to, carry this.
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
Pardon me, madam: little joy have I    To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.    King Richard, he is in the mighty hold    Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd:    In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,    And some few vanities that make him light;    But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,    Besides himself, are all the English peers,    And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.    Post you to London, and you will find it so;    I speak no more than every one doth know.
Fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: I am as well in my wits, Fool, as thou art.
Ay, but not frighted me. Therefore Ill sleep again.
You are one of thoseWould have him wed again.
Whats that?
He wonders to what end you have assembled    Such troops of citizens to come to him,    His grace not being warned thereof before.    He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
Thou saw'st them, when I had prosperity.
Or docks, or mallows.
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear    it in the behalf of his friend:   and I'll swear to    the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and    that thou wilt not be drunk;   but I know thou art no    tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be    drunk:   but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst    be a tall fellow of thy hands.
What, is he angry?
It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause;    For I am loath to break our country's laws.    Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are:    Things past redress are now with me past care.
Taste your legs, sir. Put them to motion.
They must take it in sense that feel it.
Did you see my cap?
Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
Most rare.
Thou hast hit it. Come, sit on me.
(  aside  ) What, what?
Against them both my true joints bended be.Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!
Take heed you dally not before your king,    Lest He that is the supreme King of kings    Confound your hidden falsehood, and award    Either of you to be the others end.
Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not    That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,    Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,    Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen    In murders and in outrage, boldly here;    But when from under this terrestrial ball    He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines    And darts his light through every guilty hole,    Then murders, treasons and detested sins,    The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,    Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?    So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,    Who all this while hath revell'd in the night    Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,    Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,    His treasons will sit blushing in his face,    Not able to endure the sight of day,    But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.    Not all the water in the rough rude sea    Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;    The breath of worldly men cannot depose    The deputy elected by the Lord:    For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd    To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,    God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay    A glorious angel:   then, if angels fight,    Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
My Lord of Norfolk
Prithee come, will you?
The voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.
(sings) O' the twelfth day of December
Welcome, my son: who are the violets nowThat strew the green lap of the new come spring?
Marry, heaven forbid! Light, gentlemen, Ill bind it with my shirt.
Windy attorneys to their clients' woes,    Airy succeeders of intestate joys,    Poor breathing orators of miseries,    Let them have scope, though what they will impart    Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.
The nameWas given me by one that had some power,My father, and a king.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
No.
Prithee, peace.
Sir king, all hail! the gods preserve you!Hail, royal sir!
Sirrah, go you to Bartholmew, my page,    And see him dressed in all suits like a lady.    That done, conduct him to the drunkards chamber    And call him madam, do him obeisance.    Tell him from me, as he will win my love,    He bear himself with honorable action,    Such as he hath observed in noble ladies    Unto their lords, by them accomplishèd.    Such duty to the drunkard let him do    With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,    And say,   What is t your Honor will command,    Wherein your lady and your humble wife    May show her duty and make known her love?    And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,    And with declining head into his bosom,    Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed    To see her noble lord restored to health,    Who for this seven years hath esteemed him    No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.    And if the boy have not a womans gift    To rain a shower of commanded tears,    An onion will do well for such a shift,    Which in a napkin being close conveyed    Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.   See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst:Anon Ill give thee more instructions.
M.O.A.I. doth sway my life. Nay, but first, let me see, let me see, let me see.
Is t possible?
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.    We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.    Is it een so? Why, then, I thank you all.    I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.    More torches here!Come on then, lets to bed.    Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.    Ill to my rest.
I could not send ithere it is again  [Gives FRIAR LAWRENCE a letter]   Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,So fearful were they of infection.
Alas, poor caitiff!
[to RICHARD]     Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower.    Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard,    And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death.    Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die.     [to RICHMOND]     Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy.    Good angels guard thee from the boars annoy.    Live, and beget a happy race of kings.    Edwards unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words.    For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,    Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door;    And rail upon the hostess of the house,    And say you would present her at the leet,    Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts.    Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceivingfather of a deceitful son.
We do not know.
Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch, To try if thou be current gold indeed.Young Edward lives; think now what I would speak.
Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.    My care is loss of care, by old care done;    Your care is gain of care, by new care won:    The cares I give I have, though given away;    They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
I would he knew that I had saved his brother. Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say,For I repent me that the duke is slain.
Why, she hath a face of her own.
Twenty crowns?Ill venture so much of my hawk or hound, But twenty times so much upon my wife.
I cannot be so answerd.
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!The prince your son, with mere conceit and fearOf the queen's speed, is gone.
Being once perfected how to grant suits,    How to deny them, who t' advance and who    To trash for overtopping, new created    The creatures that were mine, I say   or changed 'em,    Or else new formed 'emhaving both the key    Of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state    To what tune pleased his ear,   that now he was    The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,    And sucked my verdure out on t. Thou attendst not.
Here comes the duke.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes.Examine other beauties.
See how they kiss and court!   Signior Lucentio,    Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow    Never to woo her more,   but do forswear her    As one unworthy all the former favors    That I have fondly flattered her withal.
Heavens thank you for t! And now, I pray you, sir    For still tis beating in my mindyour reason    For raising this sea storm?
To please the king I did; to please myself    I cannot do it;   yet I know no cause    Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,    Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest    As my sweet Richard   : yet again, methinks,    Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,    Is coming towards me, and my inward soul    With nothing trembles   : at some thing it grieves,    More than with parting from my lord the king.
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.
My mistress is my mistress; this myself,    The vigour and the picture of my youth:    This before all the world do I prefer;    This maugre all the world will I keep safe,    Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.
Now I arise.     [stands and puts on his mantle]     Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.    Here in this island we arrived, and here    Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit    Than other princesses can that have more time    For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.
O, if I thought that, Id beat him like a dog!
Do, good old grandsire, and withal make knownWhich way thou travellest. If along with us,We shall be joyful of thy company.
Oh, help, ho! Light! A surgeon!
How hast thou offended? Where is Lucentio?
If he will touch the estimate: but, for that
When the devout religion of mine eye    Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires,    And these, who, often drowned, could never die,    Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!    One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun    Neer saw her match since first the world begun.
And you shall pay well for 'em.  [Follows singing]    Will you buy any tape,    Or lace for your cape,    My dainty duck, my dear-a?    Any silk, any thread,    Any toys for your head,    Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a?    Come to the pedlar;    Money's a medler.    That doth utter all men's ware-a.
Yet come again, for thou perhaps mayst move That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
Ay, theres the point. As, to be bold with you,    Not to affect many proposèd matches    Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,    Whereto we see in all things nature tends    Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,    Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural.    Butpardon me   I do not in position    Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear    Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,    May fall to match you with her country forms,    And happily repent.
Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter; I never drank with himin all my life.
Well, my good lord, Ill do t.
(sings) Shall I bid him go, and spare not?
No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy-houses:shall's go hear the vestals sing?
'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. And this may help to thicken other proofsThat do demonstrate thinly.
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about withtroll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of theprince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of hisvirtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of thecourt.
[t    o  MARIA   ]  Prithee, hold thy peace. This is not the way. Do you not see you move him? Let me alone with him.
Lives my sweet son?
Then will I lay the serving creatures dagger on your pate. I will carry no crotchets. Ill re you, Ill fa you. Do you note me?
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Good ancient, you are welcome.Welcome, mistress.     (kisses EMILIA)     Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,    That I extend my manners. 'Tis my breeding    That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
Live loathed and long,    Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,    Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,    You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,    Cap and knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks!    Of man and beast the infinite malady    Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go?    Soft! take thy physic firstthou tooand thou;    Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.
Who is the first that doth prefer himself?
[Aside]  Lord Lucius and Lucullus? hum!
Let us take the law of our sides. Let them begin.
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.     [to SECOND MURDERER]     My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks.    O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,    Come thou on my side and entreat for me.    A begging prince what beggar pities not?
Turio, give back, or else embrace thy death;    Come not within the measure of my wrath;    Do not name Silvia thine; if once again,    Verona shall not hold thee.   Here she stands;    Take but possession of her with a touch:    I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
Pardon, sweet father.
Methinks a father    Is at the nuptial of his son a guest    That best becomes the table.   Pray you once more,    Is not your father grown incapable    Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid    With age and altering rheums?   can he speak? hear?    Know man from man? dispute his own estate?    Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing    But what he did being childish?
Ay, that Petruchio came.
[From within]  Let me come in, and you shall know my errand. I come from Lady Juliet.
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?    Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?    Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,    Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,    Or seven fair branches springing from one root:    Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,    Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;    But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,    One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,    One flourishing branch of his most royal root,    Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt,    Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,    By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.    Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,    That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee    Made him a man   ; and though thou livest and breathest,    Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent    In some large measure to thy father's death,    In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,    Who was the model of thy father's life.    Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair:    In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd,    Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,    Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:    That which in mean men we intitle patience    Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.    What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,    The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
(  aside  ) Excellent wench, say I.
What, my gracious lord?
But, my good lord, your Graces' words shall serve    As well as I had seen and heard him speak;    And do not doubt, right noble princes both,    But Ill acquaint our duteous citizens    With all your just proceedings in this case.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,    With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touch'd;    For death-like dragons here affright thee hard:    Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view    Her countless glory, which desert must gain;    And which, without desert, because thine eye    Presumes to reach, all thy whole heap must die.    Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself,    Drawn by report, adventurous by desire,    Tell thee, with speechless tongues and semblance pale,    That without covering, save yon field of stars,    Here they stand martyrs, slain in Cupid's wars;    And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist    For going on death's net, whom none resist.
Nay, but my letters, by this means being thereSo soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
Is she not a fair creature?
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine.    I have not that alacrity of spirit    Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have.    Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
Great God of heaven, say amen to all!But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
Will you go hunt, my lord?
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike    The inhospitable Cleon; but I am    For other service first:   toward Ephesus    Turn our blown sails; eftsoons I'll tell thee why.      [To LYSIMACHUS]     Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore,    And give you gold for such provision    As our intents will need?
Thou dost snore distinctly.Theres meaning in thy snores.
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thyrequests to thy friend.
Oh, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.
Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of death.  [he striketh him]  There, take thou that till thou bring better news.
My lord, the army of great Buckingham
Oh, where is Romeo? Saw you him today?Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Do you hear, sir?
Thou dost speak masterly.    My life upon t, young though thou art, thine eye    Hath stayd upon some favor that it loves.    Hath it not, boy?
How! Shes busy, and she cannot come!Is that an answer?
Bear witness, Heaven, I have my wish for ever.
Upon the stroke of four.
Fetch me the handkerchiefmy mind misgives.
Now, Catesby, what says his grace?
To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall we make the welkin dance indeed?   Shall we rouse the night owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? Shall we do that?
Nor I.
[Aside]  'Tis true; such pearls as put outladies' eyes;For I had rather wink than look on them.
Go to. I say you shall.
What then?
Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to    the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all    places alike.   Make not a city feast of it, to let    the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place:    sit, sit. The gods require our thanks.    You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with    thankfulness. For your own gifts, make yourselves    praised: but reserve still to give, lest your    deities be despised.   Lend to each man enough, that    one need not lend to another; for, were your    godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the    gods.   Make the meat be beloved more than the man    that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without    a score of villains: if there sit twelve women at    the table, let a dozen of them beas they are.   The    rest of your fees, O godsthe senators of Athens,    together with the common lag of peoplewhat is    amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for    destruction.   For these my present friends, as they    are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to    nothing are they welcome.    Uncover, dogs, and lap.
The ground indeed is tawny.
I know his lordship is but merry with me;He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.
For what reason, I beseech you?
Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well:commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my veryexquisite friend.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? Speak, nephew. Were you by when it began?
Happy indeed, as we have spent the day.    Brother, we have done deeds of charity,    Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,    Between these swelling, wrong-incensèd peers.
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
Well, call forth, call forth.
Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lord's a    bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise; and thou    knowest well enough, although thou comest to me,    that this is no time to lend money, especially upon    bare friendship, without security.   Here's three    solidares for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say    thou sawest me not. Fare thee well.
He, sir.
Look what is done cannot be now amended.    Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,    Which after-hours give leisure to repent.    If I did take the kingdom from your sons,    To make amends Ill give it to your daughter.    If I have killed the issue of your womb,    To quicken your increase I will beget    Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter.    A grandams name is little less in love    Than is the doting title of a mother.    They are as children but one step below,    Even of your metal, of your very blood,    Of all one pain, save for a night of groans    Endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow.    Your children were vexation to your youth,    But mine shall be a comfort to your age.    The loss you have is but a son being king,    And by that loss your daughter is made queen.    I cannot make you what amends I would;    Therefore accept such kindness as I can.    Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul    Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,    This fair alliance quickly shall call home    To high promotions and great dignity.    The king that calls your beauteous daughter wife    Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother.    Again shall you be mother to a king,    And all the ruins of distressful times    Repaired with double riches of content.    What, we have many goodly days to see!    The liquid drops of tears that you have shed    Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl,    Advantaging their love with interest    Of ten times double gain of happiness.    Go then, my mother; to thy daughter go.    Make bold her bashful years with your experience;    Prepare her ears to hear a wooers tale;    Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame    Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess    With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys;    And when this arm of mine hath chastisèd    The petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham,    Bound with triumphant garlands will I come    And lead thy daughter to a conquerors bed,    To whom I will retail my conquest won,    And she shall be sole victoress, Caesars Caesar.
Open t, and read it.
As surely as I live, my lord.
For aught I know, my lord, they do.
Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me tooThou mayst be damnèd for that wicked deed.O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,    And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man'    That would divorce this terror from my heart;'    Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go:    I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.
Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and the condition of this country stands, I couldheartily wish this had not befallen. But since it is asit is, mend it for your own good.
(to EMILIA)    Some of your function, mistress,    Leave procreants alone and shut the door.    Cough or cry hem if any body come.    Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch!
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as ifI were a baby still. I love you better.
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!    For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,    I will be married to a wealthy widow,    Ere three days pass,   which hath as long loved me    As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.    And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.    Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,    Shall win my love,   and so I take my leave,    In resolution as I swore before.
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come That I should wish for thee to help me curseThat bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!
Bring down the devil; for he must not dieSo sweet a death as hanging presently.
Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby,    His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries    Tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret castle,    And bid my lord, for joy of this good news,    Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
Ill, when you talk of war.
But in your daughters womb I bury them,Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breedSelves of themselves, to your recomforture.
What?
Good my lord, give me thy favor still.    Be patient, for the prize Ill bring thee to    Shall hoodwink this mischance.   Therefore speak softly.    Alls hushed as midnight yet.
Noble lords,    Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;    Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley    Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:    Henry Bolingbroke    On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand    And sends allegiance and true faith of heart    To his most royal person,   hither come    Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,    Provided that my banishment repeal'd    And lands restored again be freely granted:    If not, I'll use the advantage of my power    And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood    Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen:    The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke    It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench    The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,    My stooping duty tenderly shall show.    Go, signify as much, while here we march    Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.    Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,    That from this castle's tatter'd battlements    Our fair appointments may be well perused.    Methinks King Richard and myself should meet    With no less terror than the elements    Of fire and water, when their thundering shock    At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.    Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water:    The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain    My waters; on the earth, and not on him.    March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
Throng'd to!
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:    'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,    The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,    Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;    The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this:    Yet can I not of such tame patience boast    As to be hush'd and nought at all to say:    First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me    From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;    Which else would post until it had return'd    These terms of treason doubled down his throat.    Setting aside his high blood's royalty,    And let him be no kinsman to my liege,    I do defy him, and I spit at him;    Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:    Which to maintain I would allow him odds,    And meet him, were I tied to run afoot    Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,    Or any other ground inhabitable,    Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.    Mean time let this defend my loyalty,    By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
Is it his use?Or did the letters work upon his bloodAnd new-create his fault?
True; for he bears it not about him, 'tis hid.
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.
That I had no angry wit to be a lord.Art not thou a merchant?
To, to, to
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them:    That codding spirit had they from their mother,    As sure a card as ever won the set;    That bloody mind, I think, they learn'd of me,    As true a dog as ever fought at head.    Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.    I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole    Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay:    I wrote the letter that thy father found    And hid the gold within the letter mention'd,    Confederate with the queen and her two sons:    And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,    Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?    I play'd the cheater for thy father's hand,    And, when I had it, drew myself apart    And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter:    I pry'd me through the crevice of a wall    When, for his hand, he had his two sons' heads;    Beheld his tears, and laugh'd so heartily,    That both mine eyes were rainy like to his :    And when I told the empress of this sport,    She swooned almost at my pleasing tale,    And for my tidings gave me twenty kisses.
Is it een so? Then I defy you, stars! Thou knowst my lodging. Get me ink and paper,And hire post horses. I will hence tonight.
O blessèd, blessèd night! I am afeard, Being in night, all this is but a dream,Too flattering sweet to be substantial.
A greater gift? O, thats the sword to it.
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
Will you hoist sail, sir? Here lies your way.
He shall enlarge him.
Ay, Timon.
[aside]  O, peace! Now hes deeply in. Look how imagination blows him.
Do then, but Ill not hear.
Swear his thought over    By each particular star in heaven and    By all their influences, you may as well    Forbid the sea for to obey the moon    As or by oath remove or counsel shake    The fabric of his folly,   whose foundation    Is piled upon his faith and will continue    The standing of his body.
Come with me, fool, come.
As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of    thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of    thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to    have had thee than thus to want thee:   thou, having    made me businesses which none without thee can    sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute    them thyself or take away with thee the very    services thou hast done;   which if I have not enough    considered, as too much I cannot, to be more    thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit    therein the heaping friendships.   Of that fatal    country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very    naming punishes me with the remembrance of that    penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,    my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen    and children are even now to be afresh lamented.    Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my    son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not    being gracious, than they are in losing them when    they have approved their virtues.
[Aside]  And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
Not so, neither, but I am resolved on two points.
(  aside  ) Thats me, I warrant you.
Ha! a drum ? Thou'rt quick,    But yet I'll bury thee: thou'lt go, strong thief,    When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.    Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
Sir Valentine!
Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs.   It did come to his hands, and commands shall be executed. I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
Think you, my lord, this little prating YorkWas not incensèd by his subtle motherTo taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
In God's name and the king's, say who thou art    And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,    Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel:    Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;    As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!
Spirits, which by mine artI have from their confines called to enactMy present fancies.
[as LITIO]  Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Now, masters, draw.
To God, the widow's champion and defence.
Nay, I prithee stay a little. I hope this passionate humor of mine will change. It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.
No, wench! It eats and sleeps and hath such senses    As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest    Was in the wrack.   And, but hes something stained    With grief thats beautys canker, thou mightst call him    A goodly person.   He hath lost his fellows    And strays about to find 'em.
Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'
I am maimed for ever. Help, ho! Murder! Murder!
Set but thy foot    Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope;    So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,    To say thou'lt enter friendly.
Then let thy love be younger than thyself,    Or thy affection cannot hold the bent.  For women are as roses, whose fair flowerBeing once displayed, doth fall that very hour.
I cannot tell if to depart in silence    Or bitterly to speak in your reproof    Best fitteth my degree or your condition.    If not to answer, you might haply think    Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded    To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,    Which fondly you would here impose on me.    If to reprove you for this suit of yours,    So seasoned with your faithful love to me,    Then on the other side I checked my friends.    Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,    And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,    Definitively thus I answer you:    Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert    Unmeritable shuns your high request.    First, if all obstacles were cut away    And that my path were even to the crown    As the ripe revenue and due of birth,    Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,    So mighty and so many my defects,    That I would rather hide me from my greatness,    Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,    Than in my greatness covet to be hid    And in the vapor of my glory smothered.    But, God be thanked, there is no need of me,    And much I need to help you, were there need.    The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,    Which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time,    Will well become the seat of majesty,    And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.    On him I lay what you would lay on me,    The right and fortune of his happy stars,    Which God defend that I should wring from him.
Peace, you were best.
Magni Dominator poli,Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?
What doth she say, my lord of Buckingham?
Are you contented to resign the crown?
I will deny thee nothing! Whereon I do beseech thee, grant me this,To leave me but a little to myself.
He speaks well.
I'll do my best, sir.
[aside]  Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtlessSees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?
Look hes winding up the watch of his wit. By and by itwill strike.
Oh, ho, monster, we know what belongs to a frippery.  [puts on a gown]  O King Stephano!
Well.    Now come, my Ariel!   Bring a corollary,    Rather than want a spirit. Appear and pertly!    No tongue. All eyes! Be silent.
Most true, he does.
Aaron, what shall I say unto the empress?
Alas,    the storm is come again! My best way is to creep underhis gaberdine.   T   here is no other shelter hereabouts. Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows. I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past.    [crawlsunder gaberdine]
Sir, my liege,Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazesThan what you look on now.
See where she comes, apparell'd like the spring,    Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king    Of every virtue gives renown to men!    Her face the book of praises, where is read    Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence    Sorrow were ever razed and testy wrath    Could never be her mild companion.    You gods that made me man, and sway in love,    That have inflamed desire in my breast    To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree,    Or die in the adventure,   be my helps,    As I am son and servant to your will,    To compass such a boundless happiness!
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!How often said, my dignity would lastBut till 'twere known!
I will, my lord. God give your Grace good rest.
Thy thoughts I cleave to. Whats thy pleasure?
Out, hyperbolical fiend! How vexest thou this man! Talkest thou nothing but of ladies?
My heart is great; but it must break with silence,Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.
Poor heart, adieu. I pity thy complaining.
Hark, how they knock!Whos there?Romeo, arise. Thou wilt be taken.Stay awhile.Stand up.
But stay, here come the gardeners:    Let's step into the shadow of these trees.    My wretchedness unto a row of pins,    They'll talk of state; for every one doth so    Against a change   ; woe is forerun with woe.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse.    Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,    You are still crossing it.   Sirs, let t alone.    I will not go today, and ere I do    It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
That he, our hope, might have retired his power,    And driven into despair an enemy's hope,    Who strongly hath set footing in this land:    The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,    And with uplifted arms is safe arrived    At Ravenspurgh.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
(as  LUCENTIO]   That only came well in.   [To BAPTISTA]   Sir, list to me:    I am my fathers heir and only son.    If I may have your daughter to my wife,    Ill leave her houses three or four as good,    Within rich Pisa walls, as any one    Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,    Besides two thousand ducats by the year    Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.    What, have I pinched you, Signior Gremio?
Marry, God defend his grace should say us nay!
[Aside]   Well, I perceive    I shall not be hang'd now, although I would;    But since he's gone, the king's seas must please:    He 'scaped the land, to perish at the sea.    I'll present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre!
Marry. God forbid!    Worst in this royal presence may I speak,    Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.    Would God that any in this noble presence    Were enough noble to be upright judge    Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would    Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.    What subject can give sentence on his king?    And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?    Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,    Although apparent guilt be seen in them;    And shall the figure of God's majesty,    His captain, steward, deputy-elect,    Anointed, crowned, planted many years,    Be judged by subject and inferior breath,    And he himself not present?   O, forfend it, God,    That in a Christian climate souls refined    Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!    I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,    Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king:    My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,    Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king:    And if you crown him, let me prophesy:    The blood of English shall manure the ground,    And future ages groan for this foul act;    Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,    And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars    Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;    Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny    Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd    The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.    O, if you raise this house against this house,    It will the woefullest division prove    That ever fell upon this cursed earth.    Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,    Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!
How now? What meanst thou, that thou helpst me not?By heavens, the duke shall know how slack you have been.
Oh, my dear Cassio!My sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee    From plume-pluck'd Richard;   who with willing soul    Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields    To the possession of thy royal hand:    Ascend his throne, descending now from him;    And long live Henry, fourth of that name!
[as LUCENTIO]  Not so well appareled as I wish you were.
Fie, fie! Unknit that threat'ning unkind brow    And dart not scornful glances from those eyes    To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor.    It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,    Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,    And in no sense is meet or amiable.    A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,    Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty,    And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty    Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.    Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,    Thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee,    And for thy maintenance commits his body    To painful labor both by sea and land,    To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,    Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe,    And craves no other tribute at thy hands    But love, fair looks and true obedience    Too little payment for so great a debt.    Such duty as the subject owes the prince,    Even such a woman oweth to her husband.    And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,    And not obedient to his honest will,    What is she but a foul contending rebel    And graceless traitor to her loving lord?    I am ashamed that women are so simple    To offer war where they should kneel for peace;    Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway    When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.    Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,    Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,    But that our soft conditions and our hearts    Should well agree with our external parts?    Come, come, you froward and unable worms!    My mind hath been as big as one of yours,    My heart as great, my reason haply more,    To bandy word for word and frown for frown.    But now I see our lances are but straws,    Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,    That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.    Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,    And place your hands below your husbands foot:    In token of which duty, if he please,    My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
And I will follow, more to cross that loveThan hate for Silvia that is gone for love.
Shall satisfy your father.
So thrive my soul
Let it flow this way, my good lord.
Indeed, I should have asked thee that before.
I will be angry. What hast thou to do?Father, be quiet. He shall stay my leisure.
What mean you, sir?
Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stayFor nothing but his majesty's approach.
A god on earth thou art.
Some dungeon.
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,    That know the strong'st and surest way to get.    Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;    Tears show their love, but want their remedies.    Cousin, I am too young to be your father,    Though you are old enough to be my heir.    What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;    For do we must what force will have us do.    Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?
Kill me tomorrowlet me live tonight!
Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,    Then say if they be true.     [indicates CALIBAN]      This misshapen knave,    His mother was a witch, and one so strong    That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,    And deal in her command without her power.    These three have robbed me, and this demi-devil    For hes a bastard onehad plotted with them    To take my life.   Two of these fellows you    Must know and own. This thing of darkness I    Acknowledge mine.
I say, it is not lost.
Tush, thou art deceived.Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Methought I had, and often did I strive    To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood    Stopped in my soul   and would not let it forth    To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air,    But smothered it within my panting bulk,    Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
What thou wilt,Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smileThan hew to't with thy sword.
And mine a hundred and forty.
Therefore, so please thee to return with us    And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take    The captainship,   thou shalt be met with thanks,    Allow'd with absolute power and thy good name    Live with authority:   so soon we shall drive back    Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,    Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up    His country's peace.
How?
I may not answer.
I know thee too; and more than that I know thee,    I not desire to know. Follow thy drum;    With man's blood paint the ground, gules, gules:    Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;    Then what should war be?   This fell whore of thine    Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,    For all her cherubim look.
What is he, Biondello?
Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wishto make one there.
We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!
Lady, a happy evening!
For I have heard it saidThere is an art which in their piedness sharesWith great creating nature.
Thou'rt i' the right. Go, sir, rub your chain with crumbs. A stoup of wine, Maria!
If twere no other
Is it good een?
[to ALONSO]  Sir, we were talking that our garments seemnow as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen.
What, that my leg is too long?
Nay, thats not so.
I thank your Honor.
Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?
[to ALONSO]  Therefore, my lord
But repetition of what thou hast marred.That will I make before I let thee go.
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow!    He should have struck, not spoke;   or that these pirates,    Not enough barbarous, had not o'erboard thrown me    For to seek my mother!
What, shall I stab him as he sleeps?
Lets all sink wi' th' king.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,    Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel!    Will they not hear?   What, ho! You men, you beasts,    That quench the fire of your pernicious rage    With purple fountains issuing from your veins,    On pain of torture, from those bloody hands    Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,    And hear the sentence of your movèd prince.    Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,    By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,    Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets    And made Veronas ancient Citizens    Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments,    To wield old partisans in hands as old,    Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.    If ever you disturb our streets again,    Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.    For this time, all the rest depart away.    You, Capulet, shall go along with me,    And, Montague, come you this afternoon    To know our farther pleasure in this case,    To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.    Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
In happy time, Iago.
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?
O sir, such a life with such a wife were strange!    But if you have a stomach, to t, i' Gods name:    You shall have me assisting you in all.  But will you woo this wildcat?
Make me a willow cabin at your gate    And call upon my soul within the house.    Write loyal cantons of contemned love    And sing them loud even in the dead of night.    Halloo your name to the reverberate hills    And make the babbling gossip of the air    Cry out Olivia!   Oh, you should not rest    Between the elements of air and earth,    But you should pity me.
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findest him. I would we were well rid of this knavery.    If he may be conveniently delivered, I would he were, for I am now so far in offense with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot.   Come by and by to my chamber.
Ah sir, ah sir. Deaths the end of all.
Very true, and but a month old.
Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.
Ha!
Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montagues men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,    Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:    Which elder days shall ripen and confirm    To more approved service and desert.
'Tis he. God and Saint Stephen give you good den:I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.
I warrant you, my lord, more grace than boy.
They, for their truth, might better wear their headsThan some that have accused them wear their hats. But come, my lord, lets away.
'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived    From some forefather grief;   mine is not so,    For nothing had begot my something grief;    Or something hath the nothing that I grieve:    'Tis in reversion that I do possess;    But what it is, that is not yet known; what    I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.
His nurse? Why, she was dead ere thou wast born.
Would you have a love song or a song of good life?
Great king, within this coffin I present    Thy buried fear:   herein all breathless lies    The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,    Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.
There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried;The motto thus, 'Sic spectanda fides.'
I do not know. Friends all but now, even now,    In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom    Divesting them for bed.   And then, but now,    As if some planet had unwitted men,    Swords out, and tilting one at others breasts    In opposition bloody.   I cannot speak    Any beginning to this peevish odds,    And would in action glorious I had lost    Those legs that brought me to a part of it.
And as for Pericles,    What should he say? We wept after her hearse,    And yet we mourn: her monument    Is almost finish'd,   and her epitaphs    In glittering golden characters express    A general praise to her, and care in us    At whose expense 'tis done.
A rhyme I learned even nowOf one I danced withal.
I should sinTo think but nobly of my grandmother.Good wombs have borne bad sons.
Base men by his endowments are made great.
And so had mine.
For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.    Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,    How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.
I did not think    Thou couldst have spoke so well; ne'er dream'd thou couldst.    Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,    Thy speech had alter'd it.   Hold, here's gold for thee:    Persever in that clear way thou goest,    And the gods strengthen thee!
I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
And, Ill warrant her, full of game.
But died thy sister of her love, my boy?
I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure    I count myself in nothing else so happy    As in a soul remembering my good friends;    And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,    It shall be still thy true love's recompense:    My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
Who brought it?
And you shall be satisfied.
O, swear not by the moon, th inconstant moon, That monthly changes in her circle orb,Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Now Jove afford you cause!    To me the difference forges dread;   your greatness    Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble    To think your father, by some accident,    Should pass this way as you did:   O, the Fates!    How would he look, to see his work so noble    Vilely bound up? What would he say?   Or how    Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold    The sternness of his presence?
I fear me, never.
[Aside]  I scarce know how.
Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the airWith secrets.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,    And fearst to die? Famine is in thy cheeks.    Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes.    Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.    The world is not thy friend nor the worlds law.    The world affords no law to make thee rich.    Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.    [Holds out money]
All places that the eye of heaven visits    Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.    Teach thy necessity to reason thus;    There is no virtue like necessity.    Think not the king did banish thee,    But thou the king.   Woe doth the heavier sit,    Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.    Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour    And not the king exiled thee;   or suppose    Devouring pestilence hangs in our air    And thou art flying to a fresher clime:    Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it    To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest:    Suppose the singing birds musicians,    The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,    The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more    Than a delightful measure or a dance;    For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite    The man that mocks at it and sets it light.
As near as I could sift him on that argument,    On some apparent danger seen in him    Aim'd at your highness,     no inveterate malice.
Come, the gods have done their part in you.
[as CAMBIO]   Whate'er I read to her, Ill plead for you    As for my patron, stand you so assured,    As firmly as yourself were still in place,  Yea, and perhaps with more successful wordsThan you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
Whats that to thee?
Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,I know not what I shall incur to pass it,Having no warrant.
A little, by your favor.
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair of boots that have been candle cases,   one buckled, another laced;   an old rusty sword ta'en out of the town armory, with a broken hilt and chapeless; with two broken points;   his horse hipped, with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred,     besides possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten,     near-legged before and with a half-checked bit and a headstall of sheeps leather, which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hathbeen often burst, and now repaired with knots, one girth six times pieced, and a womans crupper of velour,which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.
I will, my lord.
I will then give it you soundly.
[To LUCENTIO]  In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Oh, heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself?
Go to! Say no more.
(  aside  ) Ay, or Ill cudgel him and make him cry O!
Here, my lord, in readiness.
Nay, lay thee down and roar,For thou hast killed the sweetest innocentThat e'er did lift up eye.
Ill teach you how to flow.
Lay it by too: another.
Come with a thought. I thank thee, Ariel. Come.
Both too; and women's sons.
(  aside  ) I knew twas I, for many do call me fool.
[waking] Why, how now? Ho, awake!
We attend his lordship; pray, signify so much.
[to GONZALO]  Nay, good my lord, be not angry.
What means this scene of rude impatience?
Heres a change indeed!
A great suspicion. Stay the friar too.
Upon mine honor, sir, I heard a humming,    And that a strange one too, which did awake me.    I shaked you, sir, and cried.   As mine eyes opened,    I saw their weapons drawn. There was a noise,    Thats verily.   'Tis best we stand upon our guard,    Or that we quit this place. Lets draw our weapons.
Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons anddaughters will be all gentlemen born.
But do you hear, sir, have you married my daughter without asking my goodwill?
Satisfy!    The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!    Let that suffice.   I have trusted thee, Camillo,    With all the nearest things to my heart, as well    My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou    Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed    Thy penitent reform'd:   but we have been    Deceived in thy integrity, deceived    In that which seems so.
[aside]  Which God revenge!
But one fiend at a time,Ill fight their legions o'er.
And look to have it yielded with all kindness.Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwardsWe may digest our complots in some form.
I pray you, hear her speak.    If she confess that she was half the wooer,    Destruction on my head if my bad blame    Light on the man.   Come hither, gentle mistress.    Do you perceive in all this noble company    Where most you owe obedience?
What,To kiss in private?
[Aside]  She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
Now, fellow,What is there?
Be it so. Amen.
Not a jot, not a jot.
If thou hatest curses,Stay not; fly, whilst thou art blest and free:Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
I would not follow him then.
Shake it off. Come on.    Well visit Caliban, my slave who never    Yields us kind answer.
Shall I go fetch your nightgown?
Nor no one here, for curses never passThe lips of those that breathe them in the air.
From all such devils, good Lord, deliver us!
Oh, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
And turns the sun to shade. Alas, alas,    Witness my son, now in the shade of death,    Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath    Hath in eternal darkness folded up.    Your aerie buildeth in our aeries nest.    O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!    As it was won with blood, lost be it so.
(to the attendant)    Do thou meet me presently at the harbor.    (to RODERIGO)    Come hither. If thou best valiant, as they say base men being in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them, list me.   The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.
Give me breath.I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on;I'll wait upon you instantly.
An you love me, lets do t. I am dog at a catch.
'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,    Which I have recovered from the Moor.    Come, guard the door without. Let him not pass,    But kill him rather. Ill after that same villain,    For tis a damnèd slave.
I say, without characters fame lives long.  [aside]  Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,I moralize two meanings in one word.
With loves light wings did I oerperch these walls,    For stony limits cannot hold love out,    And what love can do, that dares love attempt.    Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.
We are the queens abjects and must obey.    Brother, farewell.   I will unto the king,    And whatsoe'er you will employ me in,    Were it to call King Edwards widow sister,    I will perform it to enfranchise you.    Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood    Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
[To ABRAHAM]  Yes, better, sir.
I beseech your honor,Vouchsafe me a word; it does concern you near.
All comfort that the dark night can affordBe to thy person, noble father-in-law. Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
The curse my noble father laid on thee    When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper,    And with thy scorns drewst rivers from his eyes,    And then, to dry them, gavst the duke a clout    Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland    His curses then, from bitterness of soul    Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee,    And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
She hangs about his neck:If she pertain to life let her speak too.
Admired Miranda!    Indeed the top of admiration, worth    Whats dearest to th' world!   Full many a lady    I have eyed with best regard and many a time    Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage    Brought my too diligent ear.   For several virtues    Have I liked several women. Never any    With so full soul but some defect in her    Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed    And put it to the foil.   But you, O you,    So perfect and so peerless, are created    Of every creatures best.
Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a    sojourner we have; you'll lose nothing by custom.    When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good    turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou    hast the harvest out of thine own report.
She's such a one, that, were I well assured    Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,    I'ld wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed.    Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty    Expect even here, where is a kingly patient:    If that thy prosperous and artificial feat    Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,    Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay    As thy desires can wish.
Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing,And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.
Look behind you, my lord.
O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.    Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain;    The spinsters and the knitters in the sun    And the free maids that weave their thread with bones    Do use to chant it   . It is silly sooth,    And dallies with the innocence of love,    Like the old age.
He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjectsthe name of good by his government. How far is hiscourt distant from this shore?
The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams    That ever entered in a drowsy head    Have I since your departure had, my lords.    Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murdered    Came to my tent and cried on victory.    I promise you, my soul is very jocund    In the remembrance of so fair a dream.    How far into the morning is it, lords?
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh,how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in.   Laura to his lady was but a kitchen-wench marry, she had a better love to berhyme her   Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy, Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose.    Signior Romeo, bonjour! Theres a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
'Tis grace indeed.Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;The other for some while a friend.
Ill come to him.
My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, wholately came from the king, commands the contrary.
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,    And quite lost their hearts:   the nobles hath he fined    For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
No better.
You said you would believe me;But, not to be a troubler of your peace,I will end here.
Look thee, 'tis so! Thou singly honest man,    Here, take: the gods out of my misery    Have sent thee treasure.   Go, live rich and happy;    But thus condition'd: thou shalt build from men;    Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,    But let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone,    Ere thou relieve the beggar; give to dogs    What thou deny'st to men; let prisons swallow 'em,    Debts wither 'em to nothing;   be men like    blasted woods,    And may diseases lick up their false bloods!    And so farewell and thrive.
[to FERDINAND]    Be of comfort.    My fathers of a better nature, sir,    Than he appears by speech.   This is unwonted    Which now came from him.
Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed.
Servant-monster? The folly of this island. They say theres but five upon this isle. We are three of them. If th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.
Take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room.
Here.
Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come again.    I go, sir, but I would not have you to think that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness.   But, as yousay, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I will awake it anon.
As she lived peerless,    So her dead likeness, I do well believe,    Excels whatever yet you look'd upon    Or hand of man hath done;   therefore I keep it    Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare    To see the life as lively mock'd as ever    Still sleep mock'd death:   behold, and say 'tis well.    [PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE standing like a statue]  I like your silence, it the more shows offYour wonder: but yet speak; first, you, my liege,Comes it not something near?
That's not feigned; he is so.
At all times alike    Men are not still the same: 'twas time and griefs    That framed him thus:   time, with his fairer hand,    Offering the fortunes of his former days,    The former man may make him. Bring us to him,    And chance it as it may.
Tis torture and not mercy. Heaven is here,    Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog    And little mouse, every unworthy thing,    Live here in heaven and may look on her,    But Romeo may not.   More validity,    More honorable state, more courtship lives    In carrion flies than Romeo.   They may seize    On the white wonder of dear Juliets hand    And steal immortal blessing from her lips,    Who even in pure and vestal modesty,    Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.    But Romeo may not. He is banishèd.    Flies may do this, but I from this must fly.    They are free men, but I am banishèd.    And sayst thou yet that exile is not death?    Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife,    No sudden mean of death, though neer so mean,    But banishèd to kill me?Banishèd!    O Friar, the damnèd use that word in hell.    Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,    Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,    A sin-absolver, and my friend professed,    To mangle me with that word banishèd?
And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong as any man in Illyria.
[as CAMBIO]  Mistress, whats your opinion of your sister?
As merry as you will.
Nay, certainly to-night;    For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough    That threw her in the sea.   Make a fire within:    Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.
You will not then?
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; andthen, death, death!
Depress'd he is already, and deposed    'Tis doubt he will be:   letters came last night    To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's,    That tell black tidings.
Thats he that was Othello. Here I am.
Art not thou the Lady Olivias fool?
'Tis truly so.
Signior, it is the Moor.
Trouble him no further; thus you still shall find him.
Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like themanner of your garments well.
Not for becauseYour brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,Become some women best, so that there be notToo much hair there, but in a semicircleOr a half-moon made with a pen.
Infer fair Englands peace by this alliance.
My masters.
So please you, sir, their speedHath been beyond account.
[as LITIO]   Madam, before you touch the instrument,    To learn the order of my fingering    I must begin with rudiments of art,    To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,    More pleasant, pithy, and effectual    Than hath been taught by any of my trade.    And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
Ill not have it so.
To whom?
I dare be sworn    These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king,    beshrew them!    He must be told on't, and he shall: the office    Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me:    If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister    And never to my red-look'd anger be    The trumpet any more.   Pray you, Emilia,    Commend my best obedience to the queen:    If she dares trust me with her little babe,    I'll show't the king and undertake to be    Her advocate to the loud'st.   We do not know    How he may soften at the sight o' the child:    The silence often of pure innocence    Persuades when speaking fails.
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed    With ravens feather from unwholesome fen    Drop on you both!   A southwest blow on ye    And blister you all o'er!
I never practised it.
And daily new exactions are devised,    As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:    But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?
(handing a paper)       Lady, you have. Pray you, peruse that letter.    You must not now deny it is your hand.    Write from it if you can, in hand or phrase;    Or say tis not your seal, not your invention:    You can say none of this.   Well, grant it then    And tell me, in the modesty of honor,    Why you have given me such clear lights of favor,    Bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you,    To put on yellow stockings, and to frown    Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people?    And, acting this in an obedient hope,    Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,    Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,    And made the most notorious geck and gull    That e'er invention played on? Tell me why.
Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must take out the work?   A likelypiece of work, that you should find it in your chamber,and not know who left it there! This is some minxs token, and I must take out the work? There, give it yourhobby-horse. Wheresoever you had it, Ill take out no work on t.
Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
Hark, Petruchio: she says shell see thee hanged first.
How does my bounteous sister? Go with meTo bless this twain that they may prosperous be,And honored in their issue.
[To VIOLA]  A sister! You are she.
[to the bishops]  Come, let us to our holy task again.Farewell, my cousin. Farewell, gentle friends.
She took the ring of me. Ill none of it.
Not worth my thinking. How now, poet!
(  sings  )  His eyes do show his days are almost done.
The empress, the midwife, and yourself:Two may keep counsel when the third's away:Go to the empress, tell her this I said.
Stanley, what news with you?
[reads]  Jove knows I love,But who?Lips, do not move; No man must know.No man must know. What follows? The numbers altered. No man must know. If this should be thee, Malvolio?
Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?
I cannot speakSo well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut outThe purity of his.
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
My mother had a maid called Barbary,    She was in love, and he she loved proved mad    And did forsake her.   She had a song of Willow,    An old thing twas, but it expressed her fortune    And she died singing it.   That song tonight    Will not go from my mind. I have much to do    But to go hang my head all at one side    And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.
'Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea.Well, there's for you: leave us.
Now, by my holidam, here comes Katherina!
Go fetch them hither. If they deny to come,Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
Come, go along and see the truth hereof,For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Yet
Painting is welcome.    The painting is almost the natural man;    or since dishonour traffics with man's nature,    He is but outside:   these pencill'd figures are    Even such as they give out. I like your work;    And you shall find I like it: wait attendance    Till you hear further from me.
Lets hear.  [he plays]  O fie! The treble jars.
'Tis common:    A thousand moral paintings I can show    That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's    More pregnantly than words.   Yet you do well    To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen    The foot above the head.
Oh, thereby hangs a tail.
But yet I love my country, and am notOne that rejoices in the common wreck,As common bruit doth put it.
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
What must the king do now? must he submit?    The king shall do it: must he be deposed?    The king shall be contented: must he lose    The name of king? o' God's name, let it go:    I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,    My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,    My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,    My figured goblets for a dish of wood,    My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff,    My subjects for a pair of carved saints    And my large kingdom for a little grave,    A little little grave, an obscure grave;    Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,    Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet    May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;    For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;    And buried once, why not upon my head?    Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin!    We'll make foul weather with despised tears;    Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,    And make a dearth in this revolting land.    Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,    And make some pretty match with shedding tears?    As thus, to drop them still upon one place,    Till they have fretted us a pair of graves    Within the earth; and, therein laid,there lies    Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.    Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see    I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.    Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,    What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty    Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?    You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
A witty mother! Witless else her son.
By the world,    I think my wife be honest and think she is not.    I think that thou art just and think thou art not.    Ill have some proof.   Her name, that was as fresh    As Dians visage, is now begrimed and black    As mine own face. If there be cords or knives,    Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,    Ill not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
Master, a marcantant, or a pedant, I know not what, but formal in apparel,In gait and countenance surely like a father.
Ancient, what makes he here?
I do attend here on the generalAnd think it no addition, nor my wish,To have him see me womaned.
But, hark! What noise?
Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned. Your widow-dolor likewise be unwept!
And mine shall.    Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling    Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,    One of their kind, that relish all as sharply    Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art?    Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th' quick,    Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury    Do I take part.   The rarer action is    In virtue than in vengeance. They being penitent,    The sole drift of my purpose doth extend    Not a frown further.   Go release them, Ariel.    My charms Ill break, their senses Ill restore,    And they shall be themselves.
What, Patch-breech, I say!
[presenting a paper]  Heres the challenge, read it. Warrant theres vinegar and pepper in t.
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:On what condition stands it and wherein?
[seeing MIRANDA]    Most sure, the goddess    On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer    May know if you remain upon this island,    And that you will some good instruction give    How I may bear me here.   My prime request,    Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!    If you be maid or no.
My heart is ever at your service, my lord.
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.
Why came I hither but to that intent?    Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?    Have I not in my time heard lions roar?    Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds,    Rage like an angry boar chafèd with sweat?    Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,    And heavens artillery thunder in the skies?    Have I not in a pitchèd battle heard    Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?    And do you tell me of a womans tongue    That gives not half so great a blow to hear    As will a chestnut in a farmers fire?    Tush, tush! Fear boys with bugs.
I mean, sir, in delay.    We waste our lights in vain, like lights by day.    Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits    Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
You shall have none ill, sir, for Ill try if they can lick their fingers.
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours.Too late he died that might have kept that title, Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
Musicians, O musicians, Hearts Ease, Hearts Ease.O, an you will have me live, play Hearts Ease.
You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's seethese four threes of herdsmen.
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
Good mother, be content; it is no moreThan my poor life must answer.
Aumerle that was;    But that is lost for being Richard's friend,    And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:    I am in parliament pledge for his truth    And lasting fealty to the new-made king.
I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks he hathno drowning mark upon him. His complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging.   Make therope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage. If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.
(  aside  ) Out, scab!
Make way, unruly woman!
No;You shall not make me welcome:I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
You undergo too strict a paradox,    Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:    Your words have took such pains as if they labour'd    To bring manslaughter into form and set quarrelling    Upon the head of valour;   which indeed    Is valour misbegot and came into the world    When sects and factions were newly born:    He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer    The worst that man can breathe, and make his wrongs    His outsides, to wear them like his raiment,    carelessly,    And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,    To bring it into danger.    If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,    What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!
Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
Some such thingI said, and said no more but what my thoughtsDid warrant me was likely.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,    Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,    And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,    So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
Barely in title, not in revenue.
By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. I had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has.   [To th    e  FOOL   ]   In sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last night when thou spokest of Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus. 'Twas very good, i' faith.   I sent thee sixpence for thy leman. Hadst it?
Give me thy hand.
What one, my lord?
Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
A thing slipp'd idly from me.    Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes    From whence 'tis nourish'd:   the fire i' the flint    Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame    Provokes itself and like the current flies    Each bound it chafes. What have you there?
Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies;    There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,    And secretly to greet the empress' friends.    Come on, you thick lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence;    For it is you that puts us to our shifts:    I'll make you feed on berries and on roots,    And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,    And cabin in a cave, and bring you up    To be a warrior, and command a camp.
O my friends,    I have one word to say to you:   look you, my good lord,    I must entreat you, honour me so much    As to advance this jewel; accept it and wear it,    Kind my lord.
I do, and surely    It is a sleepy language, and thou speakst    Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?    This is a strange repose, to be asleep    With eyes wide open, standing, speaking, moving,    And yet so fast asleep.
O my brother,    Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir    Afresh within me, and these thy offices,    So rarely kind, are as interpreters    Of my behind-hand slackness.   Welcome hither,    As is the spring to the earth.   And hath he too    Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,    At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,    To greet a man not worth her pains, much less    The adventure of her person?
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant, avirtuous Where is your mother?
[t    o  SIR TOBY BELCH   ]  La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart! Pray God, he be not bewitched!
It may not be.
[aside]  These be fine things, an if they be not sprites. Thats a brave god and bears celestial liquor. I will kneel to him.
What dost thou know?
Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds,    Rather than make unprofited return.
No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect.    The enemies' drum is heard, and fearful scouring    Doth choke the air with dust: in, and prepare:    Ours is the fall, I fear; our foes the snare.
Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king,
I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.
This is as t should be.Let me see the county.    Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.    Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar!    Our whole city is much bound to him.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.
Rub him about the temples.
Death, that hath taen her hence to make me wail,Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Lie with her? lie on her? We say lie on her when theybelie her! Lie with herthats fulsome. Handkerchiefconfessionshandkerchief!   To confess, and be hanged for his labor.   First to be hanged, and then toconfessI tremble at it   .   Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some instruction. It is not words that shake me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips. Is t possible? Confess!Handkerchief!Oh, devil!
Here, madam, at your service.
Draw near,    And list what with our council we have done.    For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd    With that dear blood which it hath fostered;    And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect    Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword;    And for we think the eagle-winged pride    Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,    With rival-hating envy, set on you    To wake our peace,   which in our country's cradle    Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;    Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,    With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,    And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,    Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace    And make us wade even in our kindred's blood,    Therefore, we banish you our territories:    You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,    Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields    Shall not regreet our fair dominions,    But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul. So from thy souls love didst thou love her brothers,And from my hearts love I do thank thee for it.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?
May we not see him?
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.
What! This gentleman will out-talk us all.
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him.   He knows not yet of his honorable fortune. If you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure.   I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me.   I will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high suppertime, and the night grows to waste. About it!
'Ad Jovem,' that's for you: here, 'Ad Apollinem:'    'Ad Martem,' that's for myself:    Here, boy, to Pallas: here, to Mercury:    To Saturn, Caius, not to Saturnine;    You were as good to shoot against the wind.    To it, boy! Marcus, loose when I bid.    Of my word, I have written to effect;    There's not a god left unsolicited.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I;    I hold him but a fool that will endanger    His body for a girl that loves him not:    I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
Good morrow, Richmond.
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,    To be full like me: yet they say we are    Almost as like as eggs; women say so,    That will say anything but were they false    As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false    As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes    No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true    To say this boy were like me.   Come, sir page,    Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!    Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?may't be?    Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:    Thou dost make possible things not so held,    Communicatest with dreams;how can this be?    With what's unreal thou coactive art,    And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent    Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,    And that beyond commission, and I find it,    And that to the infection of my brains    And hardening of my brows.
Lets to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for more money.
How now! what news?
Pardon him, sweet Timandra; for his wits    Are drown'd and lost in his calamities.    I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,    The want whereof doth daily make revolt    In my penurious band:   I have heard, and grieved,    How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,    Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states,    But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them,
What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?
Are you sure of that?
Good queen!
Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,From where you do remain let paper show.
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
Hold, then. Go home, be merry. Give consent    To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.    Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone.    Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.    [Shows her a vial]    Take thou this vial, being then in bed,    And this distillèd liquor drink thou off,    When presently through all thy veins shall run    A cold and drowsy humor, for no pulse    Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.    No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.    The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade    To wanny ashes, thy eyes windows fall    Like death when he shuts up the day of life.    Each part, deprived of supple government,    Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death.    And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death    Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,    And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.    Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes    To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.    Then, as the manner of our country is,    In thy best robes uncovered on the bier    Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault    Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.    In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,    Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,    And hither shall he come, and he and I    Will watch thy waking, and that very night    Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.    And this shall free thee from this present shame,    If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,    Abate thy valor in the acting it.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Once more, take her hence.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight. Grief of my sons exile hath stopped her breath.What further woe conspires against mine age?
Do not torment me. Oh!
No; if I mistakeIn those foundations which I build upon,The centre is not big enough to bearA school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!He who shall speak for her is afar off guiltyBut that he speaks.
Faith, I can cut a caper.
Have done, have done.
Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again.    I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins    That almost freezes up the heat of life.    I'll call them back again to comfort me.    Nurse!What should she do here?    My dismal scene I needs must act alone.    Come, vial.   [Holds out the vial]   What if this mixture do not work at all?    Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?    No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.    [Lays down a knife]    What if it be a poison which the friar    Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,    Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored    Because he married me before to Romeo?    I fear it isand yet methinks it should not,    For he hath still been tried a holy man.    How if, when I am laid into the tomb,    I wake before the time that Romeo    Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point.    Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,    To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,    And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?    Or, if I live, is it not very like    The horrible conceit of death and night,    Together with the terror of the place    As in a vault, an ancient receptacle    Where for this many hundred years the bones    Of all my buried ancestors are packed;    Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,    Lies fest'ring in his shroud;   where, as they say,    At some hours in the night spirits resort    Alack, alack, is it not like that I,    So early wakingwhat with loathsome smells,    And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,    That living mortals, hearing them, run mad    O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,    Environèd with all these hideous fears,    And madly play with my forefathers' joints,    And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,    And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone    As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?    O, look! Methinks I see my cousin's ghost    Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body    Upon a rapier's point.   Stay, Tybalt, stay!    Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to thee.
And to that end we wished your Lordship hereT' avoid the censures of the carping world.
O, ay; and pities them.
Find them out whose names are written here? It is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his penciland the painter with his nets.   But I am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned in good time!
Well, madam, and in health.
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in thesea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
What fit is this, good lady?
Adieu, brave Moor. Use Desdemona well.
Come hither: pray you,    How goes the world,   that I am thus encounter'd    With clamourous demands of date-broke bonds,    And the detention of long-since-due debts,    Against my honour?
The note lies in s throat, if he say I said so.
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
What says his majesty?
If Tamora entreat him, then he will:    For I can smooth and fill his aged ear    With golden promises;   that, were his heart    Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,    Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.     [To AEMILIUS]       Go thou before, be our ambassador:    Say that the emperor requests a parley    Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting    Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.
And is it thus? Repays he my deep service    With such deep contempt? Made I him king for this?    O, let me think on Hastings and be gone    To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,     (Beats him)     That feedst me with the very name of meat.    Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you    That triumph thus upon my misery.    Go, get thee gone, I say.
Farewell, sweet masters both. I must be gone.
Now, wheres my wife?
My masters, are you mad? Or what are you?   Have you no wit, manners, nor honesty but to gabble like tinkers at this time of night?   Do you make an alehouse of my ladyshouse, that you squeak out your coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice?   Is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?
His health is well sir.
Villain, what hast thou done?
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
I say a devil. Thinkst thou, Hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
Which, to preserve mine honour, I'll perform.
And that's the wavering commons:   for their love    Lies in their purses,   and whoso empties them    By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
What, with my tongue in your tail? Nay, come again,Good Kate. I am a gentleman.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.
I take all and your several visitations    So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give;    Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends,    And ne'er be weary.   Alcibiades,    Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich;    It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living    Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast    Lie in a pitch'd field.
You are right courteous knights.
I scorn thy meat; 'twould choke me, for I should    ne'er flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of    men eat Timon, and he sees 'em not!   It grieves me    to see so many dip their meat in one man's blood;    and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.    I wonder men dare trust themselves with men:    Methinks they should invite them without knives;    Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.    There's much example for't; the fellow that sits    next him now, parts bread with him, pledges the    breath of him in a divided draught, is the readiest    man to kill him: 't has been proved.   If I were a    huge man, I should fear to drink at meals;    Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:    Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
Ay, marry, what is he?
You must not enter.
It pleaseth you, my royal father, to expressMy commendations great, whose merit's less.
Ay, my lord, this same.How now, Malvolio!
What dost thou think 'tis worth?
For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one presently to SirToby.
Who governs here?
Fear her not, Lucius: somewhat doth she mean:    See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee:    Somewhither would she have thee go with her.    Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care    Read to her sons than she hath read to thee    Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,And never borrow any tear of thee.
Should beshould buzz!
No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle wordsTill time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.
And tell us what occasion of importHath all so long detained you from your wifeAnd sent you hither so unlike yourself.
Romeo can,Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it;    For who digs hills because they do aspire    Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher.    O my distressed lord, even such our griefs are;    Here they're but felt, and seen with mischief's eyes,    But like to groves, being topp'd, they higher rise.
There is no other way,Unless thou couldst put on some other shape And not be Richard, that hath done all this.
That you ask me what you are, and do not knowyourselves. Speak to 'em, fool.
My liege, the duke of Buckingham is taken.    That is the best news.   That the earl of Richmond    Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,    Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
Why, my young cousin? It is good to grow.
That, being mad herself, shes madly mated.
Sir, I thinkYou have heard of my poor services, i' the loveThat I have borne your father?
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.    My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:    The one my duty owes; but my fair name,    Despite of death that lives upon my grave,    To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.    I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here,    Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,    The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood    Which breathed this poison.
Pluck up thy spirits. Look cheerfully upon me.    Here love, thou seest how diligent I am,    To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee.    I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.    What, not a word?   Nay, then thou lovst it not    And all my pains is sorted to no proof.    Here, take away this dish.
Sweet Sir Andrew!
Go, Lovell, with all speed to Doctor Shaw.  [to RATCLIFFE]  Go thou to Friar Penker. Bid them bothMeet me within this hour at Baynards Castle.
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husbandAs if the cause were his.
Oh my fair warrior!
[within]   I do beseech youThat I may speak with you, O good my lord!
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death    I spy life peering;   but I dare not say    How near the tidings of our comfort is.
You will be schoolmasterAnd undertake the teaching of the maid:Thats your device.
'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advisesus; not to have us thrive in our mystery.
Romeo, away, be gone!    The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.    Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death    If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
By my troth, I am glad on t.
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?
Well.
[Reads]   Hermione, queen to the worthy    Leontes, king of Sicilia, thou art here accused and    arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery    with Polixenes, king of Bohemia, and conspiring    with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign    lord the king, thy royal husband:   the pretence    whereof being by circumstances partly laid open,    thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance    of a true subject, didst counsel and aid them, for    their better safety, to fly away by night.
I accuse them not.
I am an humble suitor to your virtues;    For pity is the virtue of the law,    And none but tyrants use it cruelly.    It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy    Upon a friend of mine, who, in hot blood,    Hath stepp'd into the law, which is past depth    To those that, without heed, do plunge into 't.    He is a man, setting his fate aside,    Of comely virtues:    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice    An honour in him which buys out his fault    But with a noble fury and fair spirit,    Seeing his reputation touch'd to death,    He did oppose his foe:    And with such sober and unnoted passion    He did behave his anger, ere 'twas spent,    As if he had but proved an argument.
How does the boy?
Bid my guard watch. Leave me. Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tentAnd help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,    Than this weak arm:   discomfort guides my tongue    And bids me speak of nothing but despair.    One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,    Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:    O, call back yesterday, bid time return,    And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!    To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,    O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:    For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.    Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.
Pure Dian, bless thee for thy vision! I    Will offer night-oblations to thee.   Thaisa,    This prince, the fair-betrothed of your daughter,    Shall marry her at Pentapolis.   And now,    This ornament    Makes me look dismal will I clip to form;    And what this fourteen years no razor touch'd,    To grace thy marriage-day, I'll beautify.
I know not what to say, but give me your hands.God send you joy, Petruchio. 'Tis a match.
But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,Like pleasant travelers, to break a jestUpon the company you overtake?
I swear Ill cuff you if you strike again.
Lo, now, lo!    Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me    For bringing wood in slowly. Ill fall flat.    Perchance he will not mind me.    [lies down, covered by his gaberdine]
As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters.   And yet I will not compare with anold man.
If youll come to supper tonight, you may. If you will not, come when you are next prepared for.
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device,man.
[t    o  MALVOLIO   ]  Why, how now, my bawcock! How dost thou, chuck?
My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.
Had I been seized by a hungry lion,    I would have been a breakfast to the beast,    Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.    O, Heaven be judge how I love Valentine,    Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!    And full as much, for more there cannot be,    I do detest false perjured Proteus.    Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.
Pray heartily he be at palace.
In vain! his service doneAt Lacedaemon and ByzantiumWere a sufficient briber for his life.
O lamentable day!
Tranio, you jest. But have you both forsworn me?
Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun. It shines everywhere.   I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress: Ithink I saw your wisdom there.
We know him for no less, though we are but strangers    to him.   But I can tell you one thing, my lord, and    which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timon's    happy hours are done and past, and his estate    shrinks from him.
One of Lord Timon's men.
I thank thee. Mariner, say what coast is this?
Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave:Fear not; he bears an honourable mind,And will not use a woman lawlessly.
Why have you not proclaim'd NorthumberlandAnd all the rest revolted faction traitors?
Before me, shes a good wench.
I do believe twas he.
I am much bound to you.
Yes, being kept together and put to use.
Now, the gods to-bless your honour!
Where shall I find you?
Ay.
Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bondslave?
'Faith, for the worst is filthy; and would not holdtaking, I doubt me.
By my heel, I care not.
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Would 'twere so!But not till I am dead. I'll say thou'st gold:Thou wilt be throng'd to shortly.
Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,    Of capital treason we arrest you here.    My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge    To keep him safely till his day of trial.    May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.
He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.
Where is your sister, and Hortensios wife?
Dost hate a medlar?
The best and truest;For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.
That Julius Caesar was a famous man.    With what his valor did enrich his wit,    His wit set down to make his valor live.    Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,    For now he lives in fame, though not in life.    Ill tell you what, my cousin Buckingham
Here is her fathers house, Ill call aloud.
Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true;    That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles    In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers,    The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments,    Like a false traitor and injurious villain.    Besides I say and will in battle prove,    Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge    That ever was survey'd by English eye,    That all the treasons for these eighteen years    Complotted and contrived in this land    Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.    Further I say and further will maintain    Upon his bad life to make all this good,    That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,    Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,    And consequently, like a traitor coward,    Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:    Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,    Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,    To me for justice and rough chastisement;    And, by the glorious worth of my descent,    This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
[as LUCENTIO]   Signior Hortensio, I have often heard    Of your entire affection to Bianca,    And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,    I will with you, if you be so contented,    Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
Iago hath direction what to do, But notwithstanding with my personal eyeWill I look to t.
I fear it.
[aside]  Honest lord,Thou hast said well, for some of you there presentAre worse than devils.
Yet thou didst kill my children.
How now, good fellow! wouldst thou speak with us?
What would you have me be, an I be not a woman?
(   singing)        The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,        Sing all a green willow.        Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,        Sing willow, willow, willow.        The fresh streams ran by her, and murmured her moans,        Sing willow, willow, willow.        Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones        Sing willow, willow, willow     Lay by these       Willow, willow     Prithee, hie thee, hell come anon       Sing all a green willow must be my garland.        Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve     Nay, thats not nextHark! Who is t that knocks?
God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.
Hes as tall a man as anys in Illyria.
I must believe you, sir:    I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't;    Provided that, when he's removed, your highness    Will take again your queen as yours at first,    Even for your son's sake;   and thereby for sealing    The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms    Known and allied to yours.
I prithee,    Remember I have done thee worthy service,    Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings,   served    Without or grudge or grumblings. Thou didst promise    To bate me a full year.
Here 'tis.
You tell me true.
I think, this coming summer, the King of Siciliameans to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone.    And yet no further than a wantons bird,    That lets it hop a little from his hand    Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,    And with a silken thread plucks it back again,    So loving-jealous of his liberty.
[as LUCENTIO]  Among them know you one Vincentio?
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.
I gave her such a one, twas my first gift.
What, dost thou weep? Come nearer. Then I    love thee,    Because thou art a woman,   and disclaim'st    Flinty mankind; whose eyes do never give    But thorough lust and laughter.   Pity's sleeping:    Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping!
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servants life,Who slew today a riotous gentlemanLately attendant on the duke of Norfolk.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
I have so: what of him?
Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tellWhom thou lovest best. See thou dissemble not.
Work on, My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught,    And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,    All guiltless, meet reproach.   What, ho! My lord!    My lord, I say! Othello!
Nor are they living    Who were the motives that you first went out;    Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess    Hath broke their hearts.   March, noble lord,    Into our city with thy banners spread:    By decimation, and a tithed death    If thy revenges hunger for that food    Which nature loathestake thou the destined tenth,    And by the hazard of the spotted die    Let die the spotted.
Roundly replied.
We are honour'd much by good Simonides.
I have been bold    For that I knew it the most general way    To them to use your signet and your name;    But they do shake their heads, and I am here    No richer in return.
[To SIR TOBY BELCH]  Let go thy hand.
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
Relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!
Yet you began rudely. What are you? What would you?
Why Romeo, art thou mad?
And then I comes behind.
How does thy honor? Let me lick thy shoe.   [indicates TRINCULO]  Ill not serve him. Hes not valiant.
At Pembroke, or at Ha'rfordwest in Wales.
O, 'tis too true.
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;Away with him! and let her sport herselfWith that she's big with; for 'tis PolixenesHas made thee swell thus.
My lord it shall be done.
Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha!    Thou shalt be loggerhead. Good faith, 'tis day.    The County will be here with music straight,    For so he said he would.
Why, sir, whats your conceit in that?
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!    Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight?    Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height    Before this out-dared dastard?   Ere my tongue    Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,    Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear    The slavish motive of recanting fear,    And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,    Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.
Ay, my lord; even soAs it is here set down.
Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland    To say 'King Richard':   alack the heavy day    When such a sacred king should hide his head.
With all my heart.
Thus strangers may be haled and abused.O monstrous villain!
I have heard it said so. Oh, these men, these men!    Dost thou in conscience thinktell me, Emilia    That there be women do abuse their husbands    In such gross kind?
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?    Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?    If haply you my father do suspect    An instrument of this your calling back,    Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,    Why, I have lost him too.
All have not offended;    For those that were, it is not square to take    On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands,    Are not inherited.   Then, dear countryman,    Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage:    Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin    Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall    With those that have offended:   like a shepherd,    Approach the fold and cull the infected forth,    But kill not all together.
When was this?
He hath found the meaning, for which we mean    To have his head.    He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,    Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin    In such a loathed manner;    And therefore instantly this prince must die:    For by his fall my honour must keep high.    Who attends us there?
Why, what is that to you?
Why look you so upon me?    I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,    But nothing alter'd:   what I was, I am;    More straining on for plucking back, not following    My leash unwillingly.
O, make them joyful. Grant their lawful suit.
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,which none must know but the king; and which heshall know within this hour, if I may come to thespeech of him.
If he be married.My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
Both of one horse?
Who is it?
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
O lamentable day!
Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.Approach, my Ariel, come.
You shall, my lord.
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an    open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is    necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite    also, to smell out work for the other senses.   I see    this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.    What an exchange had this been without boot! What    a boot is here with this exchange!   Sure the gods do    this year connive at us, and we may do any thing    extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of    iniquity, stealing away from his father with his    clog at his heels:   if I thought it were a piece of    honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not    do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;    and therein am I constant to my profession.
Now I know you better.When we with tears parted Pentapolis,The king my father gave you such a ring.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Ay, though it look like thee.
Come hither, Catesby. Rumor it abroad    That Anne my wife is very grievous sick.    I will take order for her keeping close.    Enquire me out some mean poor gentleman,    Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter.    The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.    Look how thou dreamst! I say again, give out    That Anne my queen is sick and like to die.    About it, for it stands me much upon    To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
Believe 't, I will.    By your furtherance I am clothed in steel;    And, spite of all the rapture of the sea,    This jewel holds his building on my arm:    Unto thy value I will mount myself    Upon a courser, whose delightful steps    Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread.    Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided    Of a pair of bases.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.This is my daughters jointure, for no moreCan I demand.
What have you now to present unto him?
I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we are prevented.
A space whose every cubit    Seems to cry out, How shall that Claribel    Measure us back to Naples?   Keep in Tunis,    And let Sebastian wake. Say this were death    That now hath seized them.   Why, they were no worse    Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples    As well as he that sleeps,   lords that can prate    As amply and unnecessarily    As this Gonzalo. I myself could make    A chough of as deep chat.   Oh, that you bore    The mind that I do, what a sleep were this    For your advancement! Do you understand me?
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's noseThat has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
You will not do't for all the world, I hope.    You are well favour'd, and your looks foreshow    You have a gentle heart.   I saw you lately,    When you caught hurt in parting two that fought:    Good sooth, it show'd well in you:   do so now:    Your lady seeks my life; come you between,    And save poor me, the weaker.
Are you drawn forth among a world of men    To slay the innocent? What is my offense?    Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?    What lawful quest have given their verdict up    Unto the frowning judge?   Or who pronounced    The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death    Before I be convict by course of law?    To threaten me with death is most unlawful.    I charge you, as you hope to have redemption,    By Christs dear blood shed for our grievous sins,    That you depart, and lay no hands on me.   The deed you undertake is damnable.
O thou dissembling cub! What wilt thou be    When time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case?    Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow    That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?    Farewell, and take her; but direct thy feet    Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.
Now blessed be the great Apollo!
O fool! fool! fool!
Alack, what troubleWas I then to you!
Hold, villain!
No, thou stand'st single, thou'rt not on him yet.
What, marry, may she?
It is even so.
My lord,
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors andfranklins say it, I'll swear it.
I like it well. Good Grumio, fetch it me.
How shall I understand you?
By mine honor, half-drunk. What is he at the gate, cousin?
A pretty peat! It is bestPut finger in the eye, an she knew why.
I thank thee, master.
I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,That I might love thee something.
She was, good Curtis, before this frost. But thou knowest winter tames man, woman and beast, for it hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and myself, fellow Curtis.
Hark, Perdita  [Drawing her aside]  I'll hear you by and by.
My brave spirit!Who was so firm, so constant, that this coilWould not infect his reason?
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmed with ale,This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
Why, so I do, the noblest that I have.    Oh, when mine eyes did see Olivia first,    Methought she purged the air of pestilence.    That instant was I turned into a hart,    And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,    E'er since pursue me.
They are; and Bolingbroke    Hath seized the wasteful king.   O, what pity is it    That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land    As we this garden!   We at time of year    Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,    Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,    With too much riches it confound itself:    Had he done so to great and growing men,    They might have lived to bear and he to taste    Their fruits of duty:   superfluous branches    We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:    Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,    Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
Out, strumpet! weepst thou for him to my face?
Behold, I have a weapon.    A better never did itself sustain    Upon a soldiers thigh.   I have seen the day    That with this little arm and this good sword    I have made my way through more impediments    Than twenty times your stop.   But, oh, vain boast!    Who can control his fate? tis not so now.    Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed.    Here is my journeys end, here is my butt,    And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.    Do you go back dismayed? tis a lost fear.    Man but a rush against Othellos breast,    And he retires. Where should Othello go?    Now, how dost thou look now?   O ill-starred wench,    Pale as thy smock! When we shall meet at compt    This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven    And fiends will snatch at it.   Cold, cold, my girl,    Even like thy chastity. O cursed, cursed slave!    Whip me, ye devils,    From the possession of this heavenly sight!    Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur,    Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!    Oh, Desdemona! Desdemona! dead! Oh! Oh!
I am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft    To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,    I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.    Under loves heavy burden do I sink.
Villain, I have done thy mother.
[to TRINCULO]  Here. Swear then how thou escapedst.
No, indeed, he is not.
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I prayLet us that are poor petitioners speak too.  Bacare,  you are marvelous forward.
I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how allthings go.
I fly, Biondello. But they may chance to need thee at home.Therefore leave us.
A spirit I am indeed,    But am in that dimension grossly clad    Which from the womb I did participate.    Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,  I should my tears let fall upon your cheekAnd say Thrice-welcome, drownèd Viola!
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?
After her, after her.
Bid me farewell.
I have it, Tranio!
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.
Run after that same peevish messenger,    The countys man. He left this ring behind him,    Would I or not. Tell him Ill none of it.    [OLIVIA hands him a ring]    Desire him not to flatter with his lord,    Nor hold him up with hopes.   I am not for him.    If that the youth will come this way tomorrow,    Ill give him reasons for t. Hie thee, Malvolio.
Well held out, i' faith.   No, I do not know you, nor I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her, nor your name is not Master Cesario, nor this is not my nose neither.  Nothing that is so is so.
Madam, Ill take my leave.
I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness:I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.
(sings) My lady is unkind, perdy.
Oh, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.
What, are you merry, knights?
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.    Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you.    And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest,    Your wife is like to reap a proper man.    There lies your way, due west.
Because methinks that she loved you as well    As you do love your lady Silvia:    She dreams of him that has forgot her love;    You dote on her that cares not for your love.    'Tis pity love should be so contrary;    And thinking of it makes me cry 'alas!'
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,    Whither away, or where is thy abode?    Happy the parents of so fair a child.    Happier the man whom favorable stars    Allot thee for his lovely bedfellow!
Well, let them rest.   Come hither, Catesby.    Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend    As closely to conceal what we impart.    Thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way.    What thinkest thou?   Is it not an easy matter    To make William Lord Hastings of our mind    For the installment of this noble duke    In the seat royal of this famous isle?
Mooncalf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good mooncalf.
It is my soul that calls upon my name.    How silver-sweet sound lovers tongues by night,    Like softest music to attending ears!
O Ratcliffe, I have dreamed a fearful dream! What thinkst thou, will our friends prove all true?
Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens?
Nay, sir, but hear me on.    All those which were his fellows but of late,    Some better than his value, on the moment    Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,    Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,    Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him    Drink the free air.
Madam, we'll tell tales.
I go.
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
Why lament you, pretty one?
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
What is the matter? How now, general?
And so say I.
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.I am in your debt for your last exercise.Come the next sabbath, and I will content you.
Sirs, take up the corse.
Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us,    But Moyses and Valerius follow him.    Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;    There is our captain: we'll follow him that's fled;    The thicket is beset; he cannot 'scape.
My lord,They have all been touch'd and found base metal, forThey have all denied him.
Was that mine?
Ay, when my father was in Rome she did.
O, forget    What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.    The senators with one consent of love    Entreat thee back to Athens;   who have thought    On special dignities, which vacant lie    For thy best use and wearing.
Shall t be tonight at supper?
Hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er    Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter;    Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers    Diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers;    And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown    My bosky acres and my unshrubbed down,    Rich scarf to my proud earth. Why hath thy queen    Summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?
Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,And we will all subscribe to thy advice:Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning.I mean that with my soul I love thy daughterAnd do intend to make her Queen of England.
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will,I will deny thee nothing.
Do not draw the curtain.
Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?
March on, march on, since we are up in arms,If not to fight with foreign enemies,Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
Ill be thy second.
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much.    Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,    Having displeased my father, to Lawrences cell    To make confession and to be absolved.
My lord, tis but begun.
What news with thee, AEmilius?
Nay, if you strive
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Hes gone.
From the Count Orsino, is it?
No, as I am a man!
Fairly spoke.Sit then and talk with her. She is thine own.What, Ariel! My industrious servant, Ariel!
Ay, my good lord, and no one in the presenceBut his red color hath forsook his cheeks.
Why, then lets home again.  [To GRUMIO]  Come, sirrah, lets away.
Too familiarIs my dear son with such sour company.I bring thee tidings of the Princes doom.
O, wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
How shall she be endow'd,if she be mated with an equal husband?
Boult, take her away; use her at thy pleasure:crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her, That true hearts cannot bear it.
You knew of his departure, as you knowWhat you have underta'en to do in's absence.
[indicating CALIBAN]  This is a strange thing as e'er I looked on.
Ay me! I see the ruin of my house.    The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind.    Insulting tyranny begins to jut    Upon the innocent and aweless throne.    Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre.    I see, as in a map, the end of all.
[as CAMBIO]   Preposterous ass, that never read so far    To know the cause why music was ordained.    Was it not to refresh the mind of man    After his studies or his usual pain?    Then give me leave to read philosophy    And, while I pause, serve in your harmony.
I fear me both are false.
Pray, entertain them; give them guide to us.
I flatter not; but say thou art a caitiff.
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.
What with him? he comes notLike to his father's greatness: his approach,So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us'Tis not a visitation framed, but forcedBy need and accident. What train?
Go to, away.
For this reason, if youll know:That shes the choice love of Signior Gremio.
Who, without those means thou talkest of, didst thouever know beloved?
Neither.
I would they were, that I might die at once,    For now they kill me with a living death.    Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,    Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops.    These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear    No, when my father York and Edward wept    To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made    When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;    Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,    Told the sad story of my fathers death    And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,    That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks    Like trees bedashed with rainin that sad time,    My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;    And what these sorrows could not thence exhale    Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.    I never sued to friend, nor enemy;    My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word.    But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,    My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the pickingon's teeth.
Madam, we'll dance.
Heaven cease this idle humor in your Honor!    Oh, that a mighty man of such descent,    Of such possessions and so high esteem,    Should be infusèd with so foul a spirit!
Then say at once what is it thou requests.
How!
I do bite my thumb, sir.
Whither would you have me?
[Scatters flowers around JULIETS closed tomb]    Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew    O woe! Thy canopy is dust and stones    Which with sweet water nightly I will dew.    Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans,    The obsequies that I for thee will keep    Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Darst thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
What a caterwauling do you keep here!   If my lady have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.
We are so virtuously bound
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
That same villain, Romeo.
Your Highness told me I should post before.
So I shall mend mine own, by the lack of thine.
Oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!    It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night    Like a rich jewel in an Ethiopes ear,    Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear.    So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows    As yonder lady oer her fellows shows.    The measure done, Ill watch her place of stand,    And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand.    Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!    For I neer saw true beauty till this night.
I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.
When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers for the name of king? To cabin, silence! Trouble us not.
The empress' sons, I take them, Chiron and Demetrius.
How now, my lord!
What, now?
Earlier too, sir, if now I be one.
At Ely House.
(reads)      Thou comest to the lady Olivia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly.   But thou liest in thy throat. That is not the matter I challenge thee for.
Fie! Your sword upon a woman?
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed.Why, or for what, the nobles were committedIs all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
Fear not: the forest is not three leagues off;If we recover that, we are sure enough.
No, sir, I live by the church.
With all my heart.   This fellow I remember    Since once he played a farmers eldest son.    'Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well.    I have forgot your name, but sure that part    Was aptly fitted and naturally performed.
Are you not a strumpet?
So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar if a beggardwell near him,   or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor stand by the church.
By this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.
You, sir? Why, what are you?
Why, whose is it?
[as LUCENTIO]   Sir, I shall not be slack;   in sign whereof,    Please ye we may contrive this afternoon    And quaff carouses to our mistress' health    And do as adversaries do in law,    Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
Look, more!
I must catechise you for it, madonna. Good my mouse of virtue, answer me.
So would I,as good a trick as ever hangman served thief.
You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.
[To SECOND SERVINGMAN]  Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Here comes the lord.
I do not find that thou dealst justly with me.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,And not till then.
At least two glasses. The time twixt six and nowMust by us both be spent most preciously.
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long. But Iwould be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.
Why, theres no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service.    Preferment goes by letter and affection,    And not by old gradation, where each second    Stood heir to th' first.   Now sir, be judge yourself,    Whether I in any just term am affined    To love the Moor.
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke.    Tell him myself, the mayor, and aldermen,    No less importing than our general good,    In deep designs, and matters of great moment    Are come to have some conference with his grace.
O, forgive me my sins!
Ha! Am I king? 'Tis sobut Edward lives.
Well, well, put up your sword.
By my troth, it is well said. For himself to mar, quoth he? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?
Singing    Where is the life that late I led    Where are those  Sit down, Kate, and welcome.Soud, soud, soud, soud!
He and myselfHave travail'd in the great shower of your gifts,And sweetly felt it.
What hast here? ballads?
Great ApolloTurn all to the best! These proclamations,So forcing faults upon Hermione,I little like.
Be wise, and get you home.
It hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.
What oclock tomorrowShall I send to thee?
Go, be gone.
What name, fair lady?
How many women would do such a message?    Alas, poor Proteus! Thou hast entertain'd    A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.    Alas, poor fool! Why do I pity him    That with his very heart despiseth me?    Because he loves her, he despiseth me;    Because I love him I must pity him.    This ring I gave him when he parted from me,    To bind him to remember my good will;    And now am I, unhappy messenger,    To plead for that which I would not obtain,    To carry that which I would have refused,    To praise his faith which I would have dispraised.    I am my master's true-confirmed love;    But cannot be true servant to my master,    Unless I prove false traitor to myself.    Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly    As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.
How blessed are we that are not simple men!Yet nature might have made me as these are,Therefore I will not disdain.
Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words    Can no way change you to a milder form,    I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end,    And love you 'gainst the nature of love,force ye.
[as LUCENTIO]   Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,    That being a stranger in this city here    Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,    Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.    Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,    In the preferment of the eldest sister.    This liberty is all that I request,    That, upon knowledge of my parentage,    I may have welcome mongst the rest that woo    And free access and favor as the rest.    And toward the education of your daughters,    I here bestow a simple instrument    And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.    [BIONDELLO  b    rings the gifts forward]    If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Sport royal, I warrant you.   I know my physic will work with him.   I will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where he shall find the letter. Observe his construction of it.   For this night, to bed, and dream onthe event. Farewell.
Will you swearNever to marry but by my free leave?
As full of valour as of royal blood:    Both have I spill'd;   O would the deed were good!    For now the devil, that told me I did well,    Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.    This dead king to the living king I'll bear    Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
One, Kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted with.Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
I know his soul is in heaven, fool.
O monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out    With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey;   and so twill do    With some men else that think themselves as safe    As thou and I, who, as thou knowst, are dear    To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
Do you love me?
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you:Please you to dispose yourselves.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:    Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,    As he is but my father's brother's son,    Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow,    Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood    Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize    The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:    He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:    Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
Come, bring her away.
Ill tear her all to pieces!
When clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks;    When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;    When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?    Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.    All may be well; but if God sort it so,    'Tis more than we deserve or I expect.
Silver. There it goes, Silver!
Come, swear to that, kiss the book. I will furnish it anon with new contents, swear.
If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some    other hour, I should derive much from't;   for,    take't of my soul, my lord leans wondrously to    discontent: his comfortable temper has forsook him;    he's much out of health, and keeps his chamber.
I see them now; then was a blessed time.
I have a tree, which grows here in my close,    That mine own use invites me to cut down,    And shortly must I fell it:     tell my friends,    Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree    From high to low throughout,   that whoso please    To stop affliction, let him take his haste,    Come hither, ere my tree hath felt the axe,    And hang himself.   I pray you, do my greeting.
She returns this ring to you, sir. You might have savedme my pains to have taken it away yourself.   She adds, moreover, that you should put your lord into a desperateassurance she will none of him.   And one thing more, that you be never so hardy to come again in his affairs,unless it be to report your lords taking of this.     Receive it so.
Who, I, my lord?
Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.
Where shall we meet i' th' morning?
Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceived;    The one is Murder, Rape is the other's name;    And therefore bind them, gentle Publius.    Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.    Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,    And now I find it; therefore bind them sure,    And stop their mouths, if they begin to cry.
Come, come, dispatch. The duke would be at dinner. Make a short shrift. He longs to see your head.
The nobleman would have dealt with her like anobleman, and she sent him away as cold as asnowball; saying his prayers too.
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
I am quit.Moe things like men! Eat, Timon, and abhor them.
I will follow you.
Why, madam, have I offered love for this,To be so flouted in this royal presence? Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?
And I, to keep all this.
How lush and lusty the grass looks! How green!
Look where he comes.
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and    in the view of the shepherd: so that all the    instruments which aided to expose the child were    even then lost when it was found.   But O, the noble    combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in    Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of    her husband, another elevated that the oracle was    fulfilled:   she lifted the princess from the earth,    and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin    her to her heart that she might no more be in danger    of losing.
[aside to PROSPERO]  Sir, all this serviceHave I done since I went.
I know you not.
I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
And be a happy mother by the deed.
See him delivered, Fabian; bring him hither.
I am like you, they say.
[to RATCLIFFE]  God bless the prince from all the pack of you! A knot you are of damnèd bloodsuckers.
O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!
What is she?
A good swift simile, but something currish.
So, so, so, so! They laugh that win!
Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow. Let me be clear of thee.
A man that all his timeHath founded his good fortunes on your love,Shared dangers with you
Not I, for this fair island.I do love Cassio well, and would do muchTo cure him of this evil
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
As hell, Sir Topas.
Had all his hairs been livesMy great revenge had stomach for them all.
By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight    Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard    Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers    Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond.    'Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me;    Under our tents Ill play the eavesdropper    To see if any mean to shrink from me.
But while I say one prayer!
Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;    Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.    Now mark me, how I will undo myself;    I give this heavy weight from off my head    And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,    The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;    With mine own tears I wash away my balm,    With mine own hands I give away my crown,    With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,    With mine own breath release all duty's rites:    All pomp and majesty I do forswear;    My manors, rents, revenues I forego;    My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:    God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!    God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!    Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,    And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!    Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,    And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!    God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says,    And send him many years of sunshine days!    What more remains?
What is it, Timon?
Now, the melancholy god protect thee, and the tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal.   I would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business might be everything and their intent everywhere, for thats it that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
For this care of Tamora,Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.
Would Katherine had never seen him, though!
Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.    Join with the Goths; and with revengeful war    Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,    And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.
God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better increasing your folly!   Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence thatyou are no fool.
[to STEPHANO]  Ill kiss thy foot. Ill swear myself thysubject.
Is't not your business too?
[reads]    Imprimis,  a loose-bodied gown
She that was ever fair and never proud,    Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,    Never lacked gold and yet went never gay,    Fled from her wish and yet said Now I may,    She that being angered, her revenge being nigh,    Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly,    She that in wisdom never was so frail    To change the cods head for the salmons tail,    She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind,    See suitors following and not look behind,    She was a wight, if ever such wights were
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
At Friar Patrick's cell,Where I intend holy confession.
Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds!    Have mercy, Jesu!Soft, I did but dream.    O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!    The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight.    Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.    What do I fear? Myself? Theres none else by.    Richard loves Richard; that is, I and I.    Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am.    Then fly! What, from myself? Great reason why:    Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?    Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good    That I myself have done unto myself?    O, no! Alas, I rather hate myself    For hateful deeds committed by myself.    I am a villain. Yet I lie. I am not.    Fool, of thyself speak well.   Fool, do not flatter.    My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,    And every tongue brings in a several tale,    And every tale condemns me for a villain.    Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree;    Murder, stern murder, in the direst degree;    All several sins, all used in each degree,    Throng to the bar, crying all, Guilty! guilty!    I shall despair. There is no creature loves me,    And if I die no soul will pity me.    And wherefore should they, since that I myself    Find in myself no pity to myself?    Methought the souls of all that I had murdered    Came to my tent, and every one did threat    Tomorrows vengeance on the head of Richard.
To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.
What wouldst do then, Apemantus?
Aybut not yet to die!
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
I am a messenger.
This savors not much of distraction.
Why, Jack, boy! Ho, boy! and as much news as wilt thou.
Lucentio is your name. Of whence, I pray?
Enough.
Here 'tis; this is it.
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banishèd.Romeo that killed himhe is banishèd.
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for. Take up my mistress' gown to his masters use! O, fie, fie, fie!
I doubt it not, sir, but you will curse your wooing.    [To  BAPTISTA  ]   Neighbor, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it.   To express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young scholar   [presenting   LUCENTIO  , disguised as  CAMBIO  ]   that hath been long studying at Rheims, as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages as the other in music and mathematics.    His name is Cambio. Pray accept his service.
Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his tides    well. Those healths will make thee and thy state    look ill, Timon.   Here's that which is too weak to    be a sinner, honest water, which ne'er left man i' the mire:    This and my food are equals; there's no odds:    Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.  [Apemantus' Grace]  Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;    I pray for no man but myself:    Grant I may never prove so fond,    To trust man on his oath or bond;    Or a harlot, for her weeping;    Or a dog, that seems a-sleeping:    Or a keeper with my freedom;    Or my friends, if I should need 'em.    Amen. So fall to't:    Rich men sin, and I eat root.
The sound is going away. Lets follow it, and after do our work.
What is your name?
What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murder! Murder!
What say you, uncle?
For he fears none.
What is his name?
The better that your Lordship please to ask.
I thought you had been willing to resign.
My daughter! Oh, my daughter!
[t    o  SEBASTIAN   ]    Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,    Now go with me and with this holy man    Into the chantry by.   There, before him    And underneath that consecrated roof,    Plight me the full assurance of your faith,    That my most jealous and too doubtful soul    May live at peace.   He shall conceal it    Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,    What time we will our celebration keep    According to my birth. What do you say?
[aside]  Ah, little joy enjoys the queen thereof,For I am she, and altogether joyless.I can no longer hold me patient.
Cross-gartered?
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
She that is Queen of Tunis; she that dwells    Ten leagues beyond mans life; she that from Naples    Can have no note, unless the sun were post    The man i' th' moons too slow   till newborn chins    Be rough and razorable; she that from whom    We all were sea-swallowed,   though some cast again,    And by that destiny to perform an act    Whereof whats past is prologue, what to come    In yours and my discharge.
I beseech you, do.
There's some ill planet reigns:    I must be patient till the heavens look    With an aspect more favourable.   Good my lords,    I am not prone to weeping, as our sex    Commonly are; the want of which vain dew    Perchance shall dry your pities:   but I have    That honourable grief lodged here which burns    Worse than tears drown:   beseech you all, my lords,    With thoughts so qualified as your charities    Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so    The king's will be perform'd!
It is his highness' pleasure that the queenAppear in person here in court. Silence!
Sirrah, lead these gentlemenTo my daughters, and tell them bothThese are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
Filth, thou liest!
Where did I leave?
Well, but whats o'clock?
I, that I wasNo prodigal.
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed;And he that's once denied will hardly speed.
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory.To feed my humor, wish thyself no harm.
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
Done. The wager?
My lord, my answer isto Lancaster;    And I am come to seek that name in England;    And I must find that title in your tongue,    Before I make reply to aught you say.
(  from within   )  Who calls there?
What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.
Who is t that calls? Is it my lady mother?Is she not down so late or up so early?What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
I have no hopeThat hes undrowned.
His garments are rich, but he wearsthem not handsomely.
A contagious breath.
'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a mans a-hungry,   to challenge him the field and then to break promise with him and make a fool of him.
'Tis most certain.
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!
Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest    As yet I do not.   But, as I can learn,    He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,    And from the crossrow plucks the letter "G",    And says a wizard told him that by G    His issue disinherited should be.    And for my name of George begins with "G",    It follows in his thought that I am he.    These, as I learn, and such like toys as these    Have moved his Highness to commit me now.
That 'once' I see by your good father's speedWill come on very slowly. I am sorry,Most sorry, you have broken from his likingWhere you were tied in duty, and as sorryYour choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,That you might well enjoy her.
I had forgot that foul conspiracy    Of the beast Caliban and his confederates    Against my life.   The minute of their plot    Is almost come.   Well done. Avoid, no more!
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;    His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.    So much for that.   Now for our Irish wars:    We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,    Which live like venom where no venom else    But only they have privilege to live.    And for these great affairs do ask some charge,    Towards our assistance we do seize to us    The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,    Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.
[to RATCLIFFE]  You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me;    Let's purge this choler without letting blood:    This we prescribe, though no physician;    Deep malice makes too deep incision;    Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed;    Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.    Good uncle, let this end where it begun;    We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
Sir, I will use    My utmost skill in his recovery,   provided    That none but I and my companion maid    Be suffer'd to come near him.
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.  [to YORK]  But come, my lord. With a heavy heart,Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
I hope, sir, you are, and I am yours.
Be confident to speak, Northumberland:    We three are but thyself;   and, speaking so,    Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.
Well, my lord,    If you may please to think I love the king    And through him what is nearest to him, which is    Your gracious self, embrace but my direction:    If your more ponderous and settled project    May suffer alteration, on mine honour,    I'll point you where you shall have such receiving    As shall become your highness;   where you may    Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,    There's no disjunction to be made, but by    As heavens forefend!your ruin; marry her,    And, with my best endeavours in your absence,    Your discontenting father strive to qualify    And bring him up to liking.
Let all my land be sold.
I long with all my heart to see the prince. I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
He hath, my lord, but be you well assuredNo more than hell unswear.
The loss of such a lord includes all harms.
This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Please your highness, postsFrom those you sent to the oracle are comeAn hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,Hasting to the court.
Where lies he?
[Aside]   One of Lord Timon's men? a gift, I    warrant. Why, this hits right; I dreamt of a silver    basin and ewer to-night.   Flaminius, honest    Flaminius; you are very respectively welcome, sir.    Fill me some wine.
[within]  A sail, a sail!
I am; therefore come down, and welcome me.
[within]  What is t oclock?
Who of my people hold him in delay?
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain.
I say, silver sound because musicians sound for silver.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lipsAs of her tongue she oft bestows on me, You would have have enough.
No, sir. I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I bitemy thumb, sir.
[as LUCENTIO]  I thank you, sir. Where then do you know bestWe be affied and such assurance ta'enAs shall with either parts agreement stand?
Oh, out of that no hope    What great hope have you!   No hope that way is    Another way so high a hope that even    Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,    But doubt discovery there.   Will you grant with me    That Ferdinand is drowned?
The dropsy drown this fool! What do you mean    To dote thus on such luggage? Lets alone,    And do the murder first.   If he awake,    From toe to crown hell fill our skins with pinches,    Make us strange stuff.
Ho, gentlemen! my lord calls.
Bid them come near.
All lost! To prayers, to prayers, all lost!
Why, how now, father!Speak ere thou diest.
[sings]    I am gone, sir,    And anon, sir,    Ill be with you again,    In a trice,    Like to the old Vice,    Your need to sustain,    Who, with dagger of lath    In his rage and his wrath,    Cries Aha, to the devil,    Like a mad lad,    Pare thy nails, dad,    Adieu, goodman devil.
[aside to ARIEL]  My tricksy spirit!
What wilt thou do?
Such as she says my lord did say I was.
Why, therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold.    Wheres the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the servingmen in their new fustian, their white stockings, and every officer his wedding garment on?   Be the Jacks fair within, the Jills fair without, the carpets laid, and everything in order?
I marry her! What? A customer? Prithee bear some charity to my wit. Do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!
What is her mother?
We have here one, sir, if she wouldbut there nevercame her like in Mytilene.
My most honourable lord, I am e'en sick of shame,that, when your lordship this other day sent to me,I was so unfortunate a beggar.
That's well spoke.
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
May see the sea hath cast upon your coast.
[Aside]   What I do next, shall be to tell the king    Of this escape and whither they are bound;    Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail    To force him after: in whose company    I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight    I have a woman's longing.
We were not born to sue, but to command;    Which since we cannot do to make you friends,    Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,    At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day:    There shall your swords and lances arbitrate    The swelling difference of your settled hate:    Since we can not atone you, we shall see    Justice design the victor's chivalry.    Lord marshal, command our officers at arms    Be ready to direct these home alarms.
Good Boatswain, have care. Wheres the Master?Play the men.
A thousand times good night!
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.
Well said, well said; the fire and cloths.    The rough and woeful music that we have,    Cause it to sound, beseech you.    The viol once more: how thou stirr'st, thou block!    The music there!   I pray you, give her air.    Gentlemen.    This queen will live: nature awakes; a warmth    Breathes out of her:   she hath not been entranced    Above five hours: see how she gins to blow    Into life's flower again!
What think you of this fool, Malvolio? Doth he not mend?
Now God in heaven forbid!
Lie
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,    I have no joy of this contract tonight.    It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,    Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be    Ere one can say It lightens.   Sweet, good night.    This bud of love, by summers ripening breath,    May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.    Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest    Come to thy heart as that within my breast.
[aside]  A proper stripling, and an amorous.
Do so. To ebbHereditary sloth instructs me.
Thou dost me yet but little hurt. Thou wilt anon, I know it by thy trembling. Now Prosper works upon thee.
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,    Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,    Keep in your bosom:   yet remain assured    That he's a made-up villain.
If these be true spies which I wear in my head, heres a goodly sight.
Ay, that's well known:    But what particular rarity?   what strange,    Which manifold record not matches? See,    Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power    Hath conjured to attend.   I know the merchant.
[Aside]  How well this honest mirth becomes their labour!
To vex thee.
The whole butt, man. My cellar is in a rock by th' seaside where my wine is hid.How now, mooncalf? How does thine ague?
Did you go to 't so young? Were you a gamester atfive or at seven?
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not sayhe lies?
Ill look to like if looking liking move. But no more deep will I endart mine eyeThan your consent gives strength to make it fly.
If you do love my brother, hate not me.    I am his brother, and I love him well.    If you are hired for meed, go back again,    And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,    Who shall reward you better for my life    Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
I cannot chooseBut pity her.
I hear the news, my lord.
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,That e'er the sun shone bright on.
Oh! My fear interprets. What, is he dead?
Mistress, your father prays you leave your booksAnd help to dress your sisters chamber up.You know tomorrow is the wedding day.
I have no more sons of the royal blood    For thee to slaughter.   For my daughters, Richard,    They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens,    And therefore level not to hit their lives.
How's this? We must take another course with you.    If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a    breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope,    shall undo a whole household,   let me be gelded like    a spaniel. Come your ways.
Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thylabour: he that loves to be flattered is worthy o'the flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to agreat matter.
These walls of ours    Were not erected by their hands from whom    You have received your griefs;   nor are they such    That these great towers, trophies and schools    should fall    For private faults in them.
Patience, good sir,Or here I'll cease.
And Julia herself did give it me;And Julia herself hath brought it hither.
She says you have some goodly jest in hand.She will not come. She bids you come to her.
Here is no use for gold.
I promise you I scarcely know myself.Hear you the news abroad?
I will be hanged, if some eternal villain,    Some busy and insinuating rogue,    Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,    Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else!
What, Curio?
'Tis so, my lord.
Nay, good my lord,
Hanged! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck toa fair end.
Not I.
Fie! What a foolish duty call you this?
Come on, come on. You are pictures out of door,    Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens,    Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,    Players in your housewifery, and hussies in your beds.
Mistake me not. I speak but as I find.Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
Fie, thou'rt a churl; ye've got a humour there    Does not become a man: 'tis much to blame.    They say, my lords, 'ira furor brevis est;' but yond    man is ever angry.   Go, let him have a table by    himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is    he fit for't, indeed.
Right welcome, sir!Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous timeIn different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.
A good wench, give it me.
A fool of thee: depart.
Well, do it, and be brief. I will walk by.    I would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit.    No, heavens forfend, I would not kill thy soul!
Oh, thou art deceived. I would have made it short, forI was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
[giving money to th    e  FOOL   ]  Come on. There is sixpence for you. Lets have a song.
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Go shake your ears!
A blessèd labor, my most sovereign lord.    Amongst this princely heap, if any here    By false intelligence, or wrong surmise    Hold me a foe,    If I unwittingly, or in my rage,    Have aught committed that is hardly borne    By any in this presence,   I desire    To reconcile me to his friendly peace.    'Tis death to me to be at enmity;    I hate it, and desire all good mens love.    First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,    Which I will purchase with my duteous service;    Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,    If ever any grudge were lodged between us;    Of you, Lord Rivers, and Lord Gray of you,    Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed of all!    I do not know that Englishman alive    With whom my soul is any jot at odds    More than the infant that is born tonight.    I thank my God for my humility.
I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,    To leave this keen encounter of our wits    And fall something into a slower method    Is not the causer of the timeless deaths    Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,    As blameful as the executioner?
And mine, my lord.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.  [to DORSET]  Take all the swift advantage of the hours.You shall have letters from me to my son In your behalf, to meet you on the way.Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
Well call thee at the cubiculo. Go.
You're liars all.
Let me but meet you ladies one hour hence,    And Ill salute your Grace of York as mother    And reverend looker-on, of two fair queens.     [to ANNE]     Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,    There to be crownèd Richards royal queen.
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Madam, I pity much your grievances;    Which since I know they virtuously are placed,    I give consent to go along with you,    Recking as little what betideth me    As much I wish all good befortune you.    When will you go?
I know t, I thank you. You do love my lord.    You have known him long, and be you well assured    He shall in strangeness stand no farther off    Than in a polite distance.
What, sovereign sir,    I did not well I meant well. All my services    You have paid home:   but that you have vouchsafed,    With your crown'd brother and these your contracted    Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,    It is a surplus of your grace, which never    My life may last to answer.
[aside]  Poor worm, thou art infected!This visitation shows it.
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acreof barren ground: long heath, brown furze, anything. The wills above be done, but I would fain die a dry death.
O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear.Go you to him from me.
Believe me, noble lord,    I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:    These high wild hills and rough uneven ways    Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,    And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,    Making the hard way sweet and delectable.    But I bethink me what a weary way    From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found    In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,    Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled    The tediousness and process of my travel:    But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have    The present benefit which I possess;    And hope to joy is little less in joy    Than hope enjoy'd:   by this the weary lords    Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done    By sight of what I have, your noble company.
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
Fetch him off, I pray you. He speaks nothing but madman.Fie on him!
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,He comes to bad intent.
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is    But for his own;     and for the right of that    We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;    And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!
Both, both, my girl.    By foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence,    But blessedly holp hither.
Good gods!
Notable pirate! Thou saltwater thief,    What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,    Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear,    Hast made thine enemies?
An I do not
Go on, go onThou canst not speak too much; I have deservedAll tongues to talk their bitterest.
I pray you, let it stand.
Thou hast faced many things.
Every day thou daffst me with some device, Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keepst from me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope.   I will indeed no longer endure it, nor am I yetpersuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.
Plague on t, an I thought he had been valiant and so cunning in fence, Id have seen him damned ere Id have challenged him.   Let him let the matter slip, and Ill give him my horse, gray Capilet.
Marry, but you shall have, and heres my hand.  [he offers her his hand]
Whither art going?
Whats that to the purpose?
This is a brave fellow.
[giving him money]    For saying so, theres gold.    Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,    Whereto thy speech serves for authority,    The like of him.   Knowst thou this country?
Oh, did he so? I charge you, go with me.
Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.
I am sorry to find you thus. I have been to seek you.
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!    This dagger hath mistaen   for, lo, his house    Is empty on the back of Montague,    And it mis-sheathèd in my daughters bosom.
Go to, farewell. Put money enough in your purse.
Stand farther.Come, proceed.
Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?
Good madonna, why mournest thou?
Two, twoa shirt and a smock.
Whos there? Othello?
Alas, why would you heap this care on me?    I am unfit for state and majesty.    I do beseech you, take it not amiss;    I cannot, nor I will not, yield to you.
Commend me to my loving countrymen,
I am for you.  [He draws his sword]
If it please the gods to defend you by men, then menmust comfort you, men must feed you, men must stiryou up. Boult's returned.
Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear.
To anger him, well have the bear again, and we will fool him black and blue. Shall we not, Sir Andrew?
Devil!  [strikes her]
'Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone;    And what remains will hardly stop the mouth    Of present dues:   the future comes apace:    What shall defend the interim? and at length    How goes our reckoning?
Foul weather?
I do believe it.
Your steward puts me off, my lord;And I am sent expressly to your lordship.
We are, my lord, and come to have the warrantThat we may be admitted where he is.
What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
Beseech you, father.
Peter, stay at the gate.
At thy good hearts oppression.
When I was born, the wind was north.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist;If wars, we are unable to resist.
Then go successantly, and plead to him.
How long a time lies in one little word!    Four lagging winters and four wanton springs    End in a word:   such is the breath of kings.
I am glad hes come, howsoe'er he comes.
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.     [shows his arm]     Look how I am bewitched! Behold mine arm    Is like a blasted sapling withered up;    And this is Edwards wife, that monstrous witch,    Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore,    That by their witchcraft thus have markèd me.
You do him injury to scorn his corse.
Hes had most favorable and happy speed.    Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,    The guttered rocks and congregated sands,    Traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel,    As having sense of beauty, do omit    Their mortal natures, letting go safely by    The divine Desdemona.
This is the fruits of rashness. Marked you not    How that the guilty kindred of the queen    Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?    O, they did urge it still unto the king.    God will revenge it.   Come, lords, will you go    To comfort Edward with our company?
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain'd face,The last true duties of thy noble son!
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out    In sharing that which you have pilled from me!    Which of you trembles not that looks on me?    If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects,    Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.    Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.
Just the contrary. The better for thy friends.
Shall I bring thee on the way?
I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
Had I a glass, I would.
Well, thou dost best.
What, like a corse?
No, sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.
Of the kings ship,The mariners, say how thou hast disposed,And all the rest o' th' fleet.
And by despairing shalt thou stand excusedFor doing worthy vengeance on thyselfThat didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
So the were bleeding-new, my lord, there's no meatlike 'em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.
Maybe the letter moved him,For, as I think, they do command him home,Deputing Cassio in his government.
Marry, hang her up for ever!
No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly. She willkeep no fool, sir, till she be married,   and fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to herrings; the husbands the bigger:   I am indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.
Four legs and two voicesa most delicate monster.His forward voice now is to speak well of his friend. His backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract.    If all the wine in my bottle will recover him, I will help his ague. Come.    [CALIBAN drinks]    Amen! I will pour some in thy other mouth.
I know she is an irksome brawling scold.If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.
Nor I, nor any    But one that's here, and that's himself,   for he    The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,    His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,    Whose sting is sharper than the sword's;    and will not    For, as the case now stands, it is a curse    He cannot be compell'd to'tonce remove    The root of his opinion, which is rotten    As ever oak or stone was sound.
Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service    Did worthily perform, and I must use you    In such another trick.   Go bring the rabble,    O'er whom I give thee power, here to this place.    Incite them to quick motion, for I must    Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple    Some vanity of mine art. It is my promise,    And they expect it from me.
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!
No.I will resist such entertainment tillMine enemy has more power.
It is my wretched fortune.
What of you?
How high a pitch his resolution soars!Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
Most mighty sovereign,You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.I never was nor never will be false.
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.
Hard fate! he might have died in war.    My lords, if not for any parts in him    Though his right arm might purchase his own time    And be in debt to none   yet, more to move you,    Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both:    And, for I know your reverend ages love    Security, I'll pawn my victories, all    My honours to you, upon his good returns.    If by this crime he owes the law his life,    Why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore    For law is strict, and war is nothing more.
(sings) Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.
Ill have no bigger. This doth fit the time, And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you    Against the general enemy Ottoman     [to BRABANTIO]    I did not see you. Welcome, gentle signior.    We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.
Thy father! O villain! He is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
He shall be endured.    What, goodman boy! I say, he shall. Go to.    Am I the master here, or you? Go to.    Youll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,    Youll make a mutiny among my guests.    You will set cock-a-hoop. Youll be the man!
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord. Thou hast a lady far more beautifulThan any woman in this waning age.
I am a foolTo weep at what I am glad of.
Art thou his father?
Prithee, read i' thy right wits.
When good manners shall lie all in one or two mens hands, and they unwashed too, tis a foul thing.
'Tis not well mended so, it is but botch'd;if not, I would it were.
Up with my tent!Here will I lie tonight.But where tomorrow? Well, alls one for that.Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
Sit, sir, I will recount it to you:But, see, I am prevented.
The voice of dead Thaisa!
Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.
Tell him, when that our princely father York    Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm,    And charged us from his soul to love each other,    He little thought of this divided friendship.    Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,    Wanting the manage of unruly jades.    In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,    To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.    In the base court? Come down? Down, court!    down, king!    For night-owls shriek where mounting larks    should sing.
I will not.
Oh, my heart bleedsTo think o' th' teen that I have turned you to,Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carriedhence the child?
In love?
These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' th' alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for herThats foul and foolish?
[aside to  LUCENTIO  ]  Husht, master, heres some good pastime toward.That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.
What did thy song bode, lady?    Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan.    And die in music.    (  singing)       Willow, willow, willow        Moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel Moor.    So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true.    So speaking as I think, alas, I die.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
On, good Camillo.
How!Do as I bid you, or you'll move me else.
She never yet was foolish that was fair,For even her folly helped her to an heir.
Warrant thee, my mans as true as steel.
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him:   it    is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the    subject, makes old hearts fresh:   they that went on    crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to    see him a man.
Nay, yet be wise, yet we see nothing done,    She may be honest yet.   Tell me but this,    Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief    Spotted with strawberries in your wifes hand?
No doubt, no doubt. O, tis a parlous boy,Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable. He is all the mothers, from the top to toe.
He; I know him.
We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,    As well appeareth by the cause you come;    Namely to appeal each other of high treason.    Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object    Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
What is your will?
Amen to that, sweet powers!    I cannot speak enough of this content.    It stops me here, it is too much of joy.    And this, and this, the greatest discords be    (kissing her)     That e'er our hearts shall make!
The taming school? What, is there such a place?
[aside]    It works!     [to FERDINAND]    Come on.     [aside]    Thou hast done well, fine Ariel!     [to FERDINAND]    Follow me.     [to ARIEL]    Hark what thou else shalt do me.
Dost thou think so, spirit?
He hath not money for these Irish wars,    His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,    But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.
By my white beard,    You offer him, if this be so, a wrong    Something unfilial:   reason my son    Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason    The father, all whose joy is nothing else    But fair posterity, should hold some counsel    In such a business.
(  aside  ) Heres an overweening rogue!
It requires swift foot.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers sake.
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic! What is this?    Proud, and I thank you, and I thank you not,    And yet not proud?   Mistress minion you,    Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,    But fettle your fine joints gainst Thursday next    To go with Paris to Saint Peters Church,    Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.    Out, you green sickness, carrion! Out, you baggage!    You tallow face!
Avaunt! Be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack.I swear tis better to be much abusedThan but to know t a little.
Sir, most heedfully.
I go, sir.
Upon my life, my lord, Ill undertake it.And so God give you quiet rest tonight!
If in Naples    I should report this now, would they believe me?    If I should say, I saw such islanders    For, certes, these are people of the island    Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note,    Their manners are more gentle-kind than of    Our human generation you shall find    Manynay, almost any.
All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazementInhabits here. Some heavenly power guide usOut of this fearful country!
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy    Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more    To blazon it,   then sweeten with thy breath    This neighbor air, and let rich musics tongue    Unfold the imagined happiness that both    Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Advise you what you say. The minister is here.   [in the voice   of Sir Topas]   Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore! Endeavor thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble-babble.
True. Save means to live.
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
How? The best?What wert thou if the King of Naples heard thee?
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
'Tis well. And I have met a gentleman    Hath promised me to help me to another,    A fine musician to instruct our mistress.    So shall I no whit be behind in duty    To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert.    Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current.    O, that your young nobility could judge    What twere to lose it and be miserable!    They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,    And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
If they have done this deed, my noble lord
Humh!
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives,that I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight.   Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Or to be naked with her friend in bedAn hour or more, not meaning any harm?
[dispersedly, within]  Bow-wow.
Make your best haste, and go notToo far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather;Besides, this place is famous for the creaturesOf prey that keep upon't.
Hold, ho! Lieutenantsir, Montanogentlemen,    Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?    Hold! The general speaks to you. Hold, for shame!
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,    Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,    Which is not yet performed me.
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
O Kate, content thee. Prithee, be not angry.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after-supper,    When thou shalt tell the process of their death.    Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,    And be inheritor of thy desire.    Farewell till then.
Labouring for nine.
That face of his I do remember well.    Yet, when I saw it last, it was besmeared    As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war.    A baubling vessel was he captain of,    For shallow draught and bulk unprizable,      With which such scathful grapple did he make    With the most noble bottom of our fleet,    That very envy and the tongue of loss    Cried fame and honor on him.   Whats the matter?
The noblest mind he carriesThat ever govern'd man.
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: butI could afflict you farther.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,    Diana's temple is not distant far,    Where you may abide till your date expire.    Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine    Shall there attend you.
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husbandDid it to help thee to a better husband.
If you affect him, sister, here I swear Ill plead for you myself, but you shall have him.
Is he not jealous?
What is the matter here?
[as LITIO]  Youll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
My lord, she's not paced yet: you must take somepains to work her to your manage. Come, we willleave his honour and her together. Go thy ways.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,I may not suffer you to visit them.The king hath strictly charged the contrary.
That shes the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
All this we swear.
His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whippedout of the court: they cherish it to make it staythere; and yet it will no more but abide.
No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.
Ill know thy thoughts.
Wherefore, gentle maiden,Do you neglect them?
He sent to me, sir,Here he comes.
You may take my word, my lord; I know, no man    Can justly praise but what he does affect:    I weigh my friend's affection with mine own;    I'll tell you true. I'll call to you.
Thou hast sworn my love to be.
O, here's Servilius; now we shall know some answer.
Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
No pains, sir. I take pleasure in singing, sir.
What, hath the firmament more suns than one?
Lives, sir.
[as LUCENTIO]  And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
Who saw Cesario, ho?
[within]   What, ho, what, ho, what, ho!
And I in all unwillingness will go.    O, would to God that the inclusive verge    Of golden metal that must round my brow    Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains!    Anointed let me be with deadly venom,    And die ere men can say, God save the Queen.
Who taught you this?
Well, come again tomorrow. Fare thee well.A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
A halter pardon him and hell gnaw his bones!    Why should he call her whore? Who keeps her company?    What place? What time? What form? What likelihood?    The Moors abused by some most villainous knave,    Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.    O heavens, that such companions thoudst unfold,    And put in every honest hand a whip    To lash the rascals naked through the world    Even from the east to th' west!
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.
Then would to Heaven that I had never seen t!
O sir, I do, and will repute you ever The patron of my life and liberty.
I go. Write to me very shortly,And you shall understand from me her mind.
Live, noble Helicane!
[within]  O good my lord, I would speak a word with you!
But, sir, here comes your boy.'Twere good he were schooled.
A slave, that still an end turns me to shame!    Sebastian, I have entertained thee,    Partly that I have need of such a youth    That can with some discretion do my business,    For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout,    But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior,    Which, if my augury deceive me not,    Witness good bringing up, fortune and truth:    Therefore know thou, for this I entertain thee.    Go presently and take this ring with thee,    Deliver it to Madam Silvia:    She loved me well deliver'd it to me.
But say, my lord, it were not registered,    Methinks the truth should live from age to age,    As twere retailed to all posterity,    Even to the general all-ending day.
I assure you, Carthage.
Go, Nurse. Go with her. Well to church tomorrow.
What says she to my birth?
I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me I am a drunkard. Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all.   To be now a sensible man, byand by a fool, and presently a beast! Oh, strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.
What a coil's here!    Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!    I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums    That are given for 'em.   Friendship's full of dregs:    Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs,    Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.
Thou liest. Thou canst not.
I hear him near.Nurse! Wife! What ho, what, Nurse, I say!
What time o' day is't, Apemantus?
Dull thing, I say so. He, that Caliban    Whom now I keep in service. Thou best knowst    What torment I did find thee in.   Thy groans    Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts    Of ever angry bears.   It was a torment    To lay upon the damned, which Sycorax    Could not again undo.   It was mine art,    When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape    The pine and let thee out.
At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any reason.    Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.     [sings]    Flout 'em and scout 'em,    And scout 'em and flout 'em.    Thought is free.
Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd    To bear the tidings of calamity.    Like an unseasonable stormy day,    Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,    As if the world were all dissolved to tears,    So high above his limits swells the rage    Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land    With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.    White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps    Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices,    Strive to speak big and clap their female joints    In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:    The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows    Of double-fatal yew against thy state;    Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills    Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,    And all goes worse than I have power to tell.
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,    Who prays continually for Richmonds good.    So much for that. The silent hours steal on,    And flaky darkness breaks within the east.    In brief, for so the season bids us be,    Prepare thy battle early in the morning,    And put thy fortune to the arbitrament    Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.    I, as I maythat which I would I cannot,    With best advantage will deceive the time,    And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms.    But on thy side I may not be too forward,    Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,    Be executed in his fathers sight.    Farewell. The leisure and the fearful time    Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love    And ample interchange of sweet discourse,    Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon.    God give us leisure for these rites of love!    Once more, adieu. Be valiant, and speed well.
Where should he have this gold? It is some poor    fragment, some slender sort of his remainder:   the    mere want of gold, and the falling-from of his    friends, drove him into this melancholy.
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:God knows I had as lief be none as one.
A delicate odour.
Romeo!
Signior, is all your family within?
Hold thy desperate hand.    Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.    Thy tears are womanish. Thy wild acts denote    The unreasonable fury of a beast.    Unseemly woman in a seeming man,    And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!    Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,    I thought thy disposition better tempered.    Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself,    And slay thy lady that in thy life lives    By doing damnèd hate upon thyself?    Why railst thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?    Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet    In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?    Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,    Which, like a usurer, aboundst in all    And usest none in that true use indeed    Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.    Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,    Digressing from the valor of a man;    Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,    Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;    Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,    Misshapen in the conduct of them both,    Like powder in a skill-less soldiers flask,    Is set afire by thine own ignorance;    And thou dismembered with thine own defence.    What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,    For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead    There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,    But thou slewst Tybaltthere art thou happy.    The law that threatened death becomes thy friend    And turns it to exilethere art thou happy.    A pack of blessings light upon thy back,    Happiness courts thee in her best array,    But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,    Thou poutst upon thy fortune and thy love.    Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.    Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.    Ascend her chamber, hence, and comfort her.    But look thou stay not till the watch be set,    For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,    Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time    To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,    Beg pardon of the Prince,   and call thee back    With twenty hundred thousand times more joy    Than thou wentst forth in lamentation.    Go before, Nurse.   Commend me to thy lady,    And bid her hasten all the house to bed,    Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.    Romeo is coming.
None, man. All idle. Whores and knaves.
Leave you! Wherefore?
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.
Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.
He's but a mad lord, and nought but humour sways him.He gave me a jewel th' other day, and now he hasbeat it out of my hat: did you see my jewel?
O musicians, because my heart itself plays My Heart isFull. O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
La you now, you hear:When she will take the rein I let her run;But she'll not stumble.
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
He cannot live, I hope, and must not die    Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven.    Ill in to urge his hatred more to Clarence    With lies well steeled with weighty arguments,    And, if I fail not in my deep intent,    Clarence hath not another day to live;    Which done, God take King Edward to His mercy,    And leave the world for me to bustle in.    For then Ill marry Warwicks youngest daughter.    What though I killed her husband and her father?    The readiest way to make the wench amends    Is to become her husband and her father;    The which will I, not all so much for love    As for another secret close intent    By marrying her which I must reach unto.    But yet I run before my horse to market.    Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns.    When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
No,'tis to thyself.
I will unbolt to you.    You see how all conditions, how all minds,    As well of glib and slippery creatures as    Of grave and austere quality, tender down    Their services to Lord Timon:   his large fortune    Upon his good and gracious nature hanging    Subdues and properties to his love and tendance    All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-faced flatterer    To Apemantus, that few things loves better    Than to abhor himself:   even he drops down    The knee before him, and returns in peace    Most rich in Timon's nod.
What do you say, Cesario?Good my lord
Weke, weke! so cries a pig prepared to the spit.
Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,    Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort;    Whose high exploits and honourable deeds    Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,    Be bold in us:   we'll follow where thou lead'st,    Like stinging bees in hottest summer's day    Led by their master to the flowered fields,    And be avenged on cursed Tamora.
I will dispatch it straight.
I have been in many; but such a night as this,Till now, I ne'er endured.
I dreamt a dream tonight.
[Aside]  Simonides!
Why, some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrown upon them. I was one, sir, in this interlude, one Sir Topas, sir, but thats all one.   [imitates MALVOLIO]   By the Lord, fool, I am not mad.   But do you remember? Madam, why laugh you at sucha barren rascal; an you smile not, hes gagged?   and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
This is a most majestic vision, and    Harmonious charmingly.   May I be bold    To think these spirits?
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.
That? What?
A very handsome man.
Hang all the husbandsThat cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourselfHardly one subject.
The best of happiness,Honour and fortunes, keep with you, Lord Timon!
See, not a man in private conferenceOr council has respect with him but he.
How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Nor I. My spirits are nimble.    They fell together all, as by consent.    They dropped, as by a thunderstroke.   What might,    Worthy Sebastian, O, what might? No more.    And yet methinks I see it in thy face,    What thou shouldst be.   Th' occasion speaks thee, and    My strong imagination sees a crown    Dropping upon thy head.
Am I like such a fellow?
Even he that makes her queen. Who else should be?
[aside]  And lessened be that small, God I beseech Him!Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.
O noble prince, I can discover all    The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.    There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,    That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples, thatthey speak i' th' nose thus?
Unless for that he comes to be your liege, You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
I say a husband.
Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora;    She is thy enemy, and I thy friend:    I am Revenge: sent from the infernal kingdom,    To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind,    By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.    Come down, and welcome me to this world's light;    Confer with me of murder and of death:    There's not a hollow cave or lurking-place,    No vast obscurity or misty vale,    Where bloody murder or detested rape    Can couch for fear, but I will find them out;    And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,    Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.
How now, sirrah! How goes the world with thee?
[to CALIBAN]  Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himselfUpon thy wicked dam, come forth!
It is yours;    And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,    So like you, 'tis the worse.   Behold, my lords,    Although the print be little, the whole matter    And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,    The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,    The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,    His smiles,    The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:    And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it    So like to him that got it, if thou hast    The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours    No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,    Her children not her husband's!
Doth this news hold of good King Edwards death?
No, no, men living flatter those that die.
I may not, madam:To the contrary I have express commandment.
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!    Most miserable hour that eer time saw    In lasting labor of his pilgrimage.    But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,    But one thing to rejoice and solace in,    And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!
And keep your mind, till you return to us,Peaceful and comfortable!
Go get thee hence, and find my dog again,    Or ne'er return again into my sight.    Away, I say! Stay'st thou to vex me here?
Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.
It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting.
Faith, none for me;   except the north-east wind,    Which then blew bitterly against our faces,    Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance    Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
Oh, then belike you fancy riches more.You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me,    would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old    man and his son aboard the prince:   told him I heard    them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he    at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter,    so he then took her to be, who began to be much    sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of    weather continuing,   this mystery remained    undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I    been the finder out of this secret, it would not    have relished among my other discredits.    [Enter Shepherd and Clown]    Here come those I have done good to against my will,    and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady?
Exton, I thank thee not;   for thou hast wrought    A deed of slander with thy fatal hand    Upon my head and all this famous land.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead!That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Please you. But I had rather kill two enemies.
Away,Thou tedious rogue! I am sorry I shall loseA stone by thee.
Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for here's nothingto be got now-a-days, unless thou canst fish for't.
O, none so welcome.
Marcus, my brother! 'tis sad Titus calls.
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, myshoulder-blade is out.
Good fellows all,    The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.    Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake,    Let's yet be fellows; let's shake our heads, and say,    As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,    'We have seen better days.'   Let each take some;    Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more:    Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
The captain that did bring me first on shore    Hath my maids garments.   He, upon some action,    Is now in durance at Malvolios suit,    A gentleman and follower of my ladys.
Alas, my father, it befits not me    Unto a stranger knight to be so bold:    He may my proffer take for an offence,    Since men take women's gifts for impudence.
Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.
Alas the day!
It is my son, young Harry Percy,Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.Harry, how fares your uncle?
Let's have that, good sir.Come on, sit down: come on, and do your bestTo fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?    Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,    That set'st the word itself against the word!    Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land;    The chopping French we do not understand.    Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there;    Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear;    That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,    Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
Traitors!Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroostedBy thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.
Music, awake her; strike!  [Music]    'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;    Strike all that look upon with marvel.   Come,    I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away,    Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him    Dear life redeems you.   You perceive she stirs:    [HERMIONE comes down]    Start not; her actions shall be holy as    You hear my spell is lawful:   do not shun her    Until you see her die again; for then    You kill her double.   Nay, present your hand:    When she was young you woo'd her; now in age    Is she become the suitor?
Shepherdess,A fair one are youwell you fit our agesWith flowers of winter.
I am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to be thought a good student,   but to be saidan honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a great scholar. The competitors enter.
Alcibiades banished!
What say you? Can you love the gentleman?    This night you shall behold him at our feast.    Read oer the volume of young Paris face    And find delight writ there with beautys pen.    Examine every married lineament    And see how one another lends content,    And what obscured in this fair volume lies    Find written in the margin of his eyes.    This precious book of love, this unbound lover,    To beautify him only lacks a cover.    The fish lives in the sea, and tis much pride    For fair without the fair within to hide.    That book in manys eyes doth share the glory    That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.    So shall you share all that he doth possess    By having him, making yourself no less.
Your Grace may do your pleasure.
Had he done so?
Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.
Nathaniels coat, sir, was not fully made,    And Gabriels pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel.    There was no link to color Peters hat,    And Walters dagger was not come from sheathing.    There were none fine but Adam, Rafe, and Gregory.    The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly.    Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
Tell thou the tale! But hadst thou not crossed me, thoushouldst have heard how her horse fell, and she under her horse.   Thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place,how she was bemoiled, how he left her with the horse upon her,   how he beat me because her horse stumbled, howshe waded through the dirt to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed that never prayed before,   how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I lost my crupper, with many things of worthymemory which now shall die in oblivion, and thou returnunexperienced to thy grave.
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?
He will not say so.
Even as my life, or blood that fosters it.
And shall I have?
Now by my George, my Garter, and my crown
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
[reads]  With a small-compassed cape
Are there no stones in heavenBut what serve for the thunder?Precious villain!
Away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard,look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane,   and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.Antony and Potpan!
So infinitely endear'd
Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at theproclamation; but he made a groan at it, and sworehe would see her to-morrow.
And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.
How now, Cassio!
Most certain. Let our catch be Thou Knave.
I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awakethe beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir upthe lewdly-inclined. I'll bring home some to-night.
Why, I think so. I am not such an ass, but I can keep my hand dry. But whats your jest?
[To TRANIO]   Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:    The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,    Her father keeps from all access of suitors    And will not promise her to any man    Until the elder sister first be wed.    The younger then is free, and not before.
Now, good Camillo;I am so fraught with curious business thatI leave out ceremony.
A love song, a love song.
It is too true an evil. Gone she is.    And whats to come of my despisèd time    Is naught but bitterness. Now, Roderigo,    Where didst thou see her?   Oh, unhappy girl!    With the Moor, sayst thou?Who would be a father?    How didst thou know twas she?   Oh, she deceives me    Past thought!What said she to you?Get more tapers,    Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?
What is your pleasure?
For this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps,    Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. Urchins    Shall, forth at vast of night that they may work,    All exercise on thee.   Thou shalt be pinched    As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging    Than bees that made 'em.
I must, shell rail in the street else.
Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Good time of day unto your royal Grace.
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?
Spirit,We must prepare to meet with Caliban.
Ay, and for that thou diest.
I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman,    But, had it been the brother of my blood,    I must have done no less with wit and safety.    You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that    I do perceive it hath offended you.    Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows    We made each other but so late ago.
Give you good morrow, sir.
Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause    To wail the dimming of our shining star,    But none can help our harms by wailing them.    Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;    I did not see your Grace.   Humbly on my knee    I crave your blessing.
Of her society    Be not afraid. I met her deity    Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son    Dove-drawn with her.   Here thought they to have done    Some wanton charm upon this man and maid,    Whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid    Till Hymens torch be lightedbut in vain.    Marss hot minion is returned again.    Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows,    Swears he will shoot no more, but play with sparrows    And be a boy right out.
'Tis most nobly spoken.
All broken implements of a ruin'd house.
Is there no manners left among maids? will they    wear their plackets where they should bear their    faces?   Is there not milking-time, when you are    going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these    secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all    our guests?   'tis well they are whispering: clamour    your tongues, and not a word more.
Whos there? Whose noise is this that ones on murder?
Nay, faith, Ill see the church a' your back, and then come back to my masters as soon as I can.
Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen,    cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one    joy crown another, so and in such manner that it    seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their    joy waded in tears.   There was casting up of eyes,    holding up of hands, with countenances of such    distraction that they were to be known by garment,    not by favour.   Our king, being ready to leap out of    himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that    joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother,    thy mother!'   then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then    embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his    daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old    shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten    conduit of many kings' reigns.   I never heard of such    another encounter, which lames report to follow it    and undoes description to do it.
In those that practise them they are, my lord.
With her?
We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.
To her, Kate!
Here were the servants of your adversary,    And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.    I drew to part them.   In the instant came    The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,    Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,    He swung about his head and cut the winds,    Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.    While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,    Came more and more and fought on part and part,    Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Off with his son Georges head!
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee    To make the base earth proud with kissing it:    Me rather had my heart might feel your love    Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.    Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,    Thus high at least, although your knee be low.
I cannot tell, except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance.   Take you assurance of her cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum.   To th' church take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient honest witnesses.    If this be not that you look for, I have no more to say,    But bid Bianca farewell forever and a day.
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.I fear, I fear,
So 'tis: this comes off well and excellent.
What, are you hurt, lieutenant?
I am a maid,    My lord, that ne'er before invited eyes,    But have been gazed on like a comet:   she speaks,    My lord, that, may be, hath endured a grief    Might equal yours, if both were justly weigh'd.    Though wayward fortune did malign my state,    My derivation was from ancestors    Who stood equivalent with mighty kings:    But time hath rooted out my parentage,    And to the world and awkward casualties    Bound me in servitude.     [Aside]     I will desist;    But there is something glows upon my cheek,    And whispers in mine ear, 'Go not till he speak.'
Sir, sir, sir
So 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should havemarried a shepherd's daughter.
Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life.    For that's an article within our law,    As dangerous as the rest. Your time's expired:    Either expound now, or receive your sentence.
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves:   my    father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll    not trouble them.   Come, bring away thy pack after    me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's    have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
I understand you not.
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied    With Romeo, till I behold himdead    Is my poor heart for a kinsman vexed.    Madam, if you could find out but a man    To bear a poison, I would temper it,    That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,    Soon sleep in quiet.   Oh, how my heart abhors    To hear him named, and cannot come to him.    To wreak the love I bore my cousin    Upon his body that slaughtered him!
Come, bring us, bring us where he is.
[within]  Mercy on us! We split, we split! Farewell, my wife and children! Farewell, brother! We split, we split, we split!
Go, Sir Andrew. Scout me for him at the corner the orchard like a bum-baily.   So soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou drawest, swear horrible,   for it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would have earned him. Away!
Will you hear me, Roderigo?
Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;    My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!    Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,    Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.
Write from us to him. Post-post-haste, dispatch.
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
Where goes Cesario?
[sings]    When that I was and a little tiny boy,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    A foolish thing was but a toy,    For the rain it raineth every day.    But when I came to mans estate,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,    For the rain it raineth every day.    But when I came, alas! to wive,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    By swaggering could I never thrive,    For the rain it raineth every day.    But when I came unto my beds,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    With toss-pots still had drunken heads,    For the rain it raineth every day.    A great while ago the world begun,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    But thats all one, our play is done,    And well strive to please you every day.
How? Unlawfully?
To have a foolish wife.
Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsinos is returned. I could hardly entreat him back. He attends your ladyships pleasure.
I am resolved.
[gives him a paper]  Well, hie thee to thy lord. I kiss his hand. My letter will resolve him of my mind.Farewell.
Why thats with watching, twill away again. Let me but bind it hard, within this hourIt will be well.  [pulls out a handkerchief]
Well, in that hit you miss. Shell not be hit    With Cupids arrow. She hath Dians wit.    And, in strong proof of chastity well armed    From loves weak childish bow, she lives uncharmed.    She will not stay the siege of loving terms,    Nor bide th encounter of assailing eyes,    Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.    Oh, she is rich in beauty, only poor    That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
The gods are witness,Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer griefFor his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.
And some have greatness thrust upon them.
A lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was yet of many accounted beautiful.   But though I could not with such estimable wonder overfar believe that, yetthus far I will boldly publish her: she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair.  She is drowned already, sir, with salt water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more.
Of what personage and years is he?
Hell be hanged yet, though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him.
I' faith, or I either?
Ay, sir. Where lies that? If twere a kibe,    'Twould put me to my slipper. But I feel not    This deity in my bosom.   Twenty consciences,    That stand twixt me and Milan, candied be they    And melt ere they molest!   Here lies your brother,    No better than the earth he lies upon,    If he were that which now hes like, thats dead;    Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it,    Can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus,    To the perpetual wink for aye might put    This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who    Should not upbraid our course.   For all the rest,    Theyll take suggestion as a cat laps milk.    Theyll tell the clock to any business that    We say befits the hour.
You have mistook, my lady,    Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!    Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,    Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,    Should a like language use to all degrees    And mannerly distinguishment leave out    Betwixt the prince and beggar:   I have said    She's an adulteress; I have said with whom:    More, she's a traitor and Camillo is    A federary with her,   and one that knows    What she should shame to know herself    But with her most vile principal, that she's    A bed-swerver, even as bad as those    That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy    To this their late escape.
O, sir, we doubt it not.
I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring aCressida to this Troilus.
[as CAMBIO]  While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
O gentle lady, do not put me to t,For I am nothing, if not critical.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate    Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love    Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me    With hate in those where I expect most love.    When I have most need to employ a friend,    And most assurèd that he is a friend,    Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile    Be he unto me:   this do I beg of God    When I am cold in love to you or yours.
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious, Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord.    He cried upon it at the merest loss,    And twice today picked out the dullest scent.    Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
[as LUCENTIO]  What countryman, I pray?
A most unhappy one. I would do much T' atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
The swifter speed the better.
My lord?
AEmilius, do this message honourably:And if he stand on hostage for his safety,Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.
Oh, wretched villain!
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all thefaults I have committed to your worship and to giveme your good report to the prince my master.
Virtue? A fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our willsare gardeners.   So that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with manyeither to have it sterile with idleness, or manured with industrywhy, the power and corrigible authority of thislies in our wills.   If the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous conclusions.   But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbittedlusts. Whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.
Soft! see how busily she turns the leaves!
I am hers.But oh, how oddly will it sound that IMust ask my child forgiveness!
Have you importuned him by any means?
You are an alchemist; make gold of that.Out, rascal dogs!
Well, we may meet again.
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune,    Why strewst thou sugar on that bottled spider,    Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?    Fool, fool, thou whetst a knife to kill thyself.    The day will come that thou shalt wish for me    To help thee curse that poisonous bunch-backed toad.
I thank thee. Lead me on.
I can say little more than I have studied, and that questions out of my part.   Good gentle one, give me modest assurance if you be the lady of the house, that Imay proceed in my speech.
Sir,We have a maid in Mytilene, I durst wager,Would win some words of him.
Widow Dido said you? You make me study of that. She was of Carthage, not of Tunis.
Oh, that I served that lady    And might not be delivered to the world,    Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,    What my estate is.
My dear lord,
Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan    The outward habit by the inward man.    But stay, the knights are coming: we will withdraw    Into the gallery.
[Aside]   What will this come to?    He commands us to provide, and give great gifts,    And all out of an empty coffer:    Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,    To show him what a beggar his heart is,    Being of no power to make his wishes good:    His promises fly so beyond his state    That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes    For every word: he is so kind that he now    Pays interest for 't; his land's put to their books.    Well, would I were gently put out of office    Before I were forced out!    Happier is he that has no friend to feed    Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.    I bleed inwardly for my lord.
Where it seems best unto your royal self.    If I may counsel you, some day or two    Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower;    Then where you please and shall be thought most fit    For your best health and recreation.
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it    That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else    In the dark backward and abysm of time?    If thou rememberest aught ere thou camest here,    How thou camest here thou mayst.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.    Her body sleeps in Capels monument,    And her immortal part with angels lives.    I saw her laid low in her kindreds vault    And presently took post to tell it you.    O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,    Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
No harm.    I have done nothing but in care of thee,    Of thee, my dear onethee my daughter, who    Art ignorant of what thou art,   naught knowing    Of whence I am, nor that I am more better    Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell    And thy no greater father.
A most virtuous princess.
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
Press me not, beseech you, so.    There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,    So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,    Were there necessity in your request, although    'Twere needful I denied it.   My affairs    Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder    Were in your love a whip to me;   my stay    To you a charge and trouble: to save both,    Farewell, our brother.
Zounds, sir, youre robbed! For shame, put on your gown.    Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul.    Even now, now, very now, an old black ram    Is tupping your white ewe.   Arise, arise,    Awake the snorting citizens with the bell    Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.    Arise, I say!
Ay.
Ay, my good lord.
And whats her history?
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon,These bloody accidents must excuse my mannersThat so neglected you.
Out o' tune, sir. You lie.   Art any more than a steward?   Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shallbe no more cakes and ale?
She had; and would incense meTo murder her I married.
Yea, forsooth, an your mistership be emperial.
Even in his throatunless it be the kingThat calls me traitor, I return the lie.
But now the duke of Buckingham and IAre come from visiting his majesty.
What, my lord! dispraise?
Tell me thine first.
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot    The foul witch Sycorax,   who with age and envy    Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?
Pitiful sight! Here lies the county slain,    And Juliet bleeding, warm and newly dead,    Who here hath lain these two days buried.    Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.    Raise up the Montagues.    Some others search.
Look to the drawbridge there!
An if she were a thornier piece of ground than sheis, she shall be ploughed.
Relent, and save your souls.    Which of youif you were a prince's son    Being pent from liberty, as I am now    If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,    Would you not entreat for life?   Ay, you would beg,    Were you in my distress.
We may live, son, to shed many more.
Nay, tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful case for me to leave his service   look you, sir: he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir.   Well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see, two-and-thirty, a pip out?    Whom, would to God, I had well knocked at first,    Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
[reads]   To the unknown beloved, this, and my good wishesHer very phrases! By your leave, wax.  Soft! And the impressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal.'Tis my lady. To whom should this be?
Humbly complaining to her deity    Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.    Ill tell you what: I think it is our way,    If we will keep in favor with the king,    To be her men and wear her livery.    The jealous o'erworn widow and herself,    Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen,    Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.
Thou singst sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' the    time: it opens the eyes of expectation:    performance is ever the duller for his act;   and,    but in the plainer and simpler kind of people, the    deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is    most courtly and fashionable:   performance is a kind    of will or testament which argues a great sickness    in his judgment that makes it.
Good, i' faith. Come, begin.
I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
How? Is this true?
How?
Then, tell me,Whos the next heir of Naples?
What is it?
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,    Brags of his substance, not of ornament.    They are but beggars that can count their worth.    But my true love is grown to such excess    I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
What a strange case was that! now, before the gods,    I am ashamed on't. Denied that honourable man!    there was very little honour showed in't. For my own    part, I must needs confess, I have received some    small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels    and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his;    yet, had he mistook him and sent to me, I should    ne'er have denied his occasion so many talents.
Hey, Mountain, hey!
Ill slit the villains nose that would have sent me tothe jail.
These violent delights have violent ends    And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,    Which, as they kiss, consume.   The sweetest honey    Is loathsome in his own deliciousness    And in the taste confounds the appetite.    Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.    Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
[as LUCENTIO]   And you, sir. You are welcome.Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
I do protest I never injured thee,    But love thee better than thou canst devise,    Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.    And so, good Capuletwhich name I tender    As dearly as my ownbe satisfied.
Hast thou read truth?
Every man shift for all the rest and let no man take care for himself, for all is but fortune. Coraggio, bully-monster, coraggio!
I will not fail. Tis twenty year till then.I have forgot why I did call thee back.
[Aside]  To laughter, as I take it,If the good truth were known.
Swum ashore, man, like a duck. I can swim like a duck, Ill be sworn.
Oh, are you come, Iago? You have done well,That men must lay their murders on your neck.
Oh, heres a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!
Dost thou hear, Iago?I will be found most cunning in my patience,Butdost thou hear?most bloody.
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitifulone, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
[as LUCENTIO]  Then thou wert best say that I am notLucentio.
I pray God he be not, I say.
Sir,    Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea,    Shook as the earth did quake;    The very principals did seem to rend,    And all-to topple: pure surprise and fear    Made me to quit the house.
You will be there, I know.
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must.But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanksThat were the cause of my imprisonment.
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Sirrah, come hither: make no more ado,    But give your pigeons to the emperor:    By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.    Hold, hold; meanwhile here's money for thy charges.    Give me pen and ink. Sirrah, can you with a grace    deliver a supplication?
[to RICHARD]  Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,Rivers, that died at Pomfret. Despair, and die!
Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my meanTo bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.
[Gives her the vial]   Hold. Get you gone. Be strong and prosperousIn this resolve. Ill send a friar with speedTo Mantua with my letters to thy lord.
What, household stuff?
[reads]     Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold.    For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.    A thing devisèd by the enemy.    Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge.    Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls.    Conscience is but a word that cowards use,    Devised at first to keep the strong in awe.    Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.    March on.   Join bravely. Let us to it pell mell    If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.     [his oration to his army]     What shall I say more than I have inferred?    Remember whom you are to cope withal,    A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways,    A scum of Bretons and base lackey peasants,    Whom their o'er-cloyèd country vomits forth    To desperate ventures and assured destruction.    You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;    You having lands and blessed with beauteous wives,    They would restrain the one, distain the other.    And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,    Long kept in Brittany at our mothers cost,    A milksop, one that never in his life    Felt so much cold as overshoes in snow?    Lets whip these stragglers o'er the seas again,    Lash hence these overweening rags of France,    These famished beggars weary of their lives,    Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit,    For want of means, poor rats, had hanged themselves.    If we be conquered, let men conquer us,    And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers    Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped,    And in record, left them the heirs of shame.    Shall these enjoy our lands, lie with our wives,    Ravish our daughters?
Ay, but hark you, my friend; 'twas we that made up    this garment through the rough seams of the waters:    there are certain condolements, certain vails. I    hope, sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from    whence you had it.
Excellent good.
Put in now, Titus.
You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must tothe watch.
[To LUCENTIO]    Come, Kate, well to bed.    We three are married, but you two are sped.    'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white,    And, being a winner, God give you good night!
What, art thou hurt?
Signior Petruchio, fie, you are to blame.Come, mistress Kate, Ill bear you company.
And what says she to my little jewel?
Whats the matter, lieutenant?
But good lieutenant, is your general wived?
Why, man?
True;When the day serves, before black-corner'd night,Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light. Come.
The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar. Cressida was a beggar.   My lady is within, sir. Iwill construe to them whence you come.   Who you are and what you would are out of my welkin, I might say element, but the word is overworn.
Are you content to stay?
I say she shall.And first begin with her.
[To MALVOLIO]  Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
Kill'd her, for whom my tears have made me blind.    I am as woful as Virginius was,    And have a thousand times more cause than he    To do this outrage: and it now is done.
Oh, a thousand thousand timesand then of so gentle a condition!
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter    His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence,    A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,    To execute the charge my father gave me    For visiting your highness:   my best train    I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;    Who for Bohemia bend, to signify    Not only my success in Libya, sir,    But my arrival and my wife's in safety    Here where we are.
How chance the prophet could not at that timeHave told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
I'll have it so. My steward!
Hed sow t with nettle seed.
Belike, for joy the emperor hath a son.
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
[Aside to her sons]    What say you, boys? will you    bide with him,    Whiles I go tell my lord the emperor    How I have govern'd our determined jest?    Yield to his humour, smooth and speak him fair,    And tarry with him till I turn again.
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
[aside to ANTONIO]  I say, tonight. No more.
If twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
O, patience!The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.
Ill stay a month longer.   I am a fellow o' th' strangest mind i' th' world. I delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether.
Why will you kill me?
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,    No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks    Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.    Nights candles are burnt out, and jocund day    Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.    I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,As beasts and birds and fishes.
It's fit it should be so; for princes are    A model which heaven makes like to itself:    As jewels lose their glory if neglected,    So princes their renowns if not respected.    'Tis now your honour, daughter, to explain    The labour of each knight in his device.
Come on, strike up!
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!    Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,    So soon forsaken?   Young mens love then lies    Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.    Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine    Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!    How much salt water thrown away in waste    To season love that of it doth not taste!    The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,    Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears.    Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit    Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.    If eer thou wast thyself and these woes thine,    Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.    And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence then:    Women may fall when theres no strength in men.
Ill be revenged on the whole pack of you.
He had need mean better than his outward show    Can any way speak in his just commend;    For by his rusty outside he appears    To have practised more the whipstock than the lance.
Why, thats my spirit!But was not this nigh shore?
Now all the blessings    Of a glad father, compass thee about.    Arise, and say how thou camest here.
Content.
Alas the day! I never gave him cause.
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself    against such a good time, when I might ha' shown    myself honourable!   how unluckily it happened, that I    should purchase the day before for a little part,    and undo a great deal of honoured!   Servilius, now,    before the gods, I am not able to do,the more    beast, I say:I was sending to use Lord Timon    myself, these gentlemen can witness!   but I would    not, for the wealth of Athens, I had done't now.    Commend me bountifully to his good lordship;   and I    hope his honour will conceive the fairest of me,    because I have no power to be kind:   and tell him    this from me, I count it one of my greatest    afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an    honourable gentleman.   Good Servilius, will you    befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him?
I cannot believe that in her. Shes full of most blessed condition.
We should have both lord and lown, if the peevishbaggage would but give way to customers.
For everUnvenerable be thy hands, if thouTakest up the princess by that forced basenessWhich he has put upon't!
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be acreature of sale.
Nothing but this: your true love for my master.
Oh, she was foul!    I scarce did know you, uncle.   There lies your niece,    Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped.    I know this act shows horrible and grim.
Ha! Ha! False to me?
That which thou canst not undo.
Oh, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste witha distempered appetite.   To be generous, guiltless, and of free disposition is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets.   There is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail.   Nor no railing in a known discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove.
Your mother.
Ready to go, but never to return.    O son! The night before thy wedding day    Hath death lain with thy wife. There she lies,    Flower as she was, deflowered by him.    Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir.    My daughter he hath wedded. I will die,    And leave him all. Life, living, all is Deaths.
Why of thy thought, Iago?
Let me live here ever.So rare a wondered father and a wifeMakes this place paradise.
This gentleman of mine hath served me long:    To build his fortune I will strain a little,    For 'tis a bond in men.   Give him thy daughter:    What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,    And make him weigh with her.
Good morr ow, lords:O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?
I like this well; he will return again.
Being done, there is no pause.
[aside]    I will converse with iron-witted fools    And unrespective boys.   None are for me    That look into me with considerate eyes.    High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.    Boy!
Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
However God or fortune cast my lot,    There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,    A loyal, just and upright gentleman:    Never did captive with a freer heart    Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace    His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,    More than my dancing soul doth celebrate    This feast of battle with mine adversary.    Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,    Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:    As gentle and as jocund as to jest    Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.
I cannot think but your age has forgot me;    It could not else be,   I should prove so base,    To sue, and be denied such common grace:    My wounds ache at you.
My father, as nurse said, did never fear,    But cried 'Good seaman!' to the sailors, galling    His kingly hands, haling ropes;    And, clasping to the mast, endured a sea    That almost burst the deck.
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
So did we woo    Transformed Timon to our city's love    By humble message and by promised means:    We were not all unkind, nor all deserve    The common stroke of war.
Thou liest.
You the like loss?
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an'tlike you, sir?
I thought as much.    One sorrow never comes but brings an heir,    That may succeed as his inheritor;    And so in ours:   some neighbouring nation,    Taking advantage of our misery,    Hath stuff'd these hollow vessels with their power,    To beat us down, the which are down already;    And make a conquest of unhappy me,    Whereas no glory's got to overcome.
Yes, tis Emilia.    (to EMILIA)    By and by.   Shes dead.    'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassios death,    The noise was high. Ha!   No more moving?    Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were t good?    I think she stirs againNo. Whats best to do?    If she come in, shell sure speak to my wife    My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.    Oh, insupportable! Oh, heavy hour!    Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse    Of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe    Should yawn at alteration.
Lets meet him and receive him.
Love wrought these miracles. Biancas love    Made me exchange my state with Tranio,    While he did bear my countenance in the town,    And happily I have arrivèd at the last    Unto the wishèd haven of my bliss.    What Tranio did, myself enforced him to.    Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
I can bear my part; you must know 'tis myoccupation; have at it with you.
There, hold!    I will not look upon your master's lines:    I know they are stuff'd with protestations    And full of new-found oaths; which he will break    As easily as I do tear his paper.
[To CALIBAN]  Come, kiss.
Why did he so?
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?Stay you, goodgentlemen.Look you pale, mistress?    Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.    Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her.    Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness    Will speak, though tongues were out of use.
Do you not hear me speak?
What a pied ninnys this! Thou scurvy patch!    I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows    And take his bottle from him.   When thats gone,    He shall drink naught but brine, for Ill not show him    Where the quick freshes are.
Will you help?An ass-head, and a coxcomb, and a knave,a thin-faced knave, a gull!
And so swear I.
This same should be the voice of Friar John.Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,    Made to write whore upon? What committed?    Committed? O thou public commoner!    I should make very forges of my cheeks    That would to cinders burn up modesty    Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?    Heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks,    The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets    Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth    And will not hear t.   What committed!    Impudent strumpet!
Romeo, the love I bear thee can affordNo better term than this: thou art a villain.
What noise there, ho?
No.    [to ANTONIO]     For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother    Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive    Thy rankest fault, all of them,   a   nd require    My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know,    Thou must restore.
[Kneeling]  I have ground the axe myself;Do you but strike the blow.
No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the minstrel.
Art thou so hasty? I have stayed for thee,God knows, in torment and in agony.
Hang thee, monster!
Then God be blessed, it is the blessèd sun.    But sun it is not, when you say it is not,    And the moon changes even as your mind.    What you will have it named, even that it is,    And so it shall be so for Katherine.
Never till this daySaw I him touched with anger so distempered.
Verily!    You put me off with limber vows; but I,    Though you would seek t'unsphere the    stars with oaths,    Should yet say 'Sir, no going.'   Verily,    You shall not go. A lady's 'Verily' is    As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?    Force me to keep you as a prisoner,    Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees    When you depart, and save your thanks.   How say you?    My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'    One of them you shall be.
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusions cure lives not    In these confusions. Heaven and yourself    Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,    And all the better is it for the maid.    Your part in her you could not keep from death,    But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.    The most you sought was her promotion,    For twas your heaven she should be advanced.    And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced    Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?    Oh, in this love, you love your child so ill    That you run mad, seeing that she is well.    Shes not well married that lives married long,    But shes best married that dies married young.    Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary    On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,    And in her best array, bear her to church.    For though some nature bids us all lament,    Yet natures tears are reasons merriment.
E'er since I can remember.
Come, come, you wasp. I' faith, you are too angry.
'Tis neither here nor there.
I fear he will. Here Catesby comes again.
Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.
Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this?    Are we turned Turks? And to ourselves do that    Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?    For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl.    He that stirs next to carve for his own rage    Holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion.    Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle    From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?    Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,    Speak, who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.
If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,And in the breath of bitter words lets smotherMy damnèd son that thy two sweet sons smothered.
What less than doomsday is the Princes doom?
Of either, madam.
Where should this music be? I' th' air or th' earth?    It sounds no more, and sure, it waits upon    Some god o' th' island.   Sitting on a bank,    Weeping again the king my fathers wrack,    This music crept by me upon the waters,    Allaying both their fury and my passion    With its sweet air. Thence I have followed it,    Or it hath drawn me rather.   But tis gone.    No, it begins again.
Art thou indeed?
How but well, sir? How but well? It were impossible I should speed amiss.
This is as uncivil as strange.   I beseech you, do me this courteous office, as to know of the knight what my offense to him is.   It is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.
Not Cassio killed! Then murders out of tune, And sweet revenge grows harsh.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.    'Tis proper I obey him, but not now.    Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,    Which, like unruly children, make their sire    Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:    Give some supportance to the bending twigs.    Go thou, and like an executioner,    Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,    That look too lofty in our commonwealth:    All must be even in our government.    You thus employ'd, I will go root away    The noisome weeds, which without profit suck    The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Arise, dissembler. Though I wish thy death,I will not be the executioner.
[Draws his sword]  Part, fools!Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Wheres thy conscience now?
Some light-foot friend post to the duke of NorfolkRatcliffe, thyself, or Catesby. Where is he?
How with mine honor may I give him thatWhich I have given to you?
I have a daughter, sir, called Katherina.
(  aside  ) O peace, peace, peace! Now, now.
Dost thou say so?
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?
If you would seek us,We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?
Call up her father.    Rouse him. Make after him, Poison his delight,    Proclaim him in the streets. Incense her kinsmen,    And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,    Plague him with flies.   Though that his joy be joy    Yet throw such changes of vexation ont,    As it may lose some color.
Dead?
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?    The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,    And the place death, considering who thou art,    If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells youcurrish thanks is good enough for such a present.
You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.
Oh, then I see that madmen have no ears.
They're welcome all; let 'em have kind admittance:Music, make their welcome!
[To SEBASTIAN]  Now, sir, have I met you again? Theres for you.
Byr Lady, thirty years.
You see this confluence, this great flood    of visitors.    I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man,    Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug    With amplest entertainment:   my free drift    Halts not particularly, but moves itself    In a wide sea of wax:   no levell'd malice    Infects one comma in the course I hold;    But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,    Leaving no tract behind.
Thou liest.
No, not a word; how can I grace my talk,Wanting a hand to give it action?Thou hast the odds of me; therefore no more.
Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
I know her answer.
It is the more like to be feigned. I pray you, keep it in.   I heard you were saucy at my gates and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you.   If you be not mad, be gone. If you have reason, be brief.    'Tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.
Presently.    Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin,    For to deny each article with oath    Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception    That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet tis that sounds.
So had you need.    In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,    And I am tied to be obedient    For so your father charged me at our parting,    "Be serviceable to my son," quoth he,    Although I think 'twas in another sense    I am content to be Lucentio    Because so well I love Lucentio.
Will it not be?Faith, sirrah, an youll not knock, Ill ring it.Ill try how you can  sol, fa,  and sing it.
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!
Ha?
[aside to  TAILOR  ]  Tailor, Ill pay thee for thy gown tomorrow.Take no unkindness of his hasty words.Away, I say. Commend me to thy master.
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her    hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her    virginity; and cry 'He that will give most shall    have her first.'   Such a maidenhead were no cheap    thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done    as I command you.
No, madam. We have culled such necessaries    As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.    So please you, let me now be left alone,    And let the Nurse this night sit up with you.    For, I am sure, you have your hands full all    In this so sudden business.
Yes, thou spokest well of me.
To such proceeding    Who ever but his approbation added,    Though not his prime consent,   he did not flow    From honourable sources.
The better for him. Would I were so too.
I do not think there is any such woman.
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,    Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,    And lay aside my high blood's royalty,    Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.    If guilty dread have left thee so much strength    As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop:    By that and all the rites of knighthood else,    Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,    What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.
Didst perceive it?  [Aside]  They're here with me already, whispering, rounding'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,That he did stay?
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i faith, wisely, wisely.
Well, come, my Kate. We will unto your fathers    Even in these honest mean habiliments.    Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor,    For tis the mind that makes the body rich,    And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,    So honor peereth in the meanest habit.    What, is the jay more precious than the lark    Because his feathers are more beautiful?    Or is the adder better than the eel    Because his painted skin contents the eye?    Oh, no, good Kate. Neither art thou the worse    For this poor furniture and mean array.    If thou accountst it shame, lay it on me,    And therefore frolic! We will hence forthwith    To feast and sport us at thy fathers house.    [To  GRUMIO  ]   Go, call my men, and let us straight to him,    And bring our horses unto Long Lane end.    There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.    Lets see, I think tis now some seven o'clock,    And well we may come there by dinnertime.
Then, by myself
Let him come near.
My language! Heavens,I am the best of them that speak this speech,Were I but where tis spoken.
What say'st thou?
[aside]    I must be married to my brothers daughter,    Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.    Murder her brothers, and then marry her    Uncertain way of gain.   But I am in    So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.    Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
And is it not well served into a sweet goose?
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue thatput me into this apparel.
Ay, Desdemona.
I think there is not in the world either malice or    matter to alter it.   You have an unspeakable    comfort of your young prince Mamillius:   it is a    gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came    into my note.
Take hands, a bargain!And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:I give my daughter to him, and will makeHer portion equal his.
Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I willpromise him an excellent piece.
I am bound to thee forever.
Ill show thee the best springs. Ill pluck thee berries.    Ill fish for thee and get thee wood enough.    A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!    Ill bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,    Thou wondrous man.
Ay, but (by your leave) not before me. The lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. Lets have no more ofthis, lets to our affairs.Forgive us our sins!Gentlemen, lets look to our business.   Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.
[to gentlemen and halberds]     What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid?    Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,    And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.    Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell.    Thou hadst but power over his mortal body;    His soul thou canst not have. Therefore begone.
Read it.
Why, there it goes: God give his lordship joy!
Hum, ha!
Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy,has done little better than played the jack with us.
Why, what would you?
You either fear his humor or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love.   Is he inconstant, sir, in his favors?
This shows a sound affection.
Will you leave me there?
I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me. Theres money for thee.  [giving money]  If you tarry longer, I shall give worse payment.
Here comes the Countess. Now heaven walks on earth.    But for thee, fellow. Fellow, thy words are madness:    Three months this youth hath tended upon me;    But more of that anon.   [To an officer]   Take him aside.
No, madam, no. I may not leave it so.I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
But did you not request to have it cut?
It is, and wants but nomination.
Alas, poor Romeo! He is already dead, stabbed with a white wenchs black eye, shot through the ear with a love song,   the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boys butt shaft. And is he a man to encounterTybalt?
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
I know not.
Contain thyself, good friend.
I'll do any thing now that is virtuous; but Iam out of the road of rutting for ever.
What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,That art thyself a man?
[as LUCENTIO]  Thats but a cavil: he is old, I young.
[taking HASTINGSs hand]  By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate, And with my hand I seal my true hearts love.
Do you not hear him? You mar our labor. Keep your cabins.You do assist the storm.
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,I dreamt my master and another fought,And that my master slew him.
Ha' not you seen, Camillo    But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass    Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,   or heard,    For to a vision so apparent rumour    Cannot be mute,or thought,for cogitation    Resides not in that man that does not think,    My wife is slippery?   If thou wilt confess,    Or else be impudently negative,    To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say    My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name    As rank as any flax-wench that puts to    Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.
Sir,With all my heart; and, when you come ashore,I have another suit.
Softly, my masters. If you be gentlemen,    Do me this right: hear me with patience.    Baptista is a noble gentleman,    To whom my father is not all unknown,    And were his daughter fairer than she is,    She may more suitors have,   and me for one.    Fair Ledas daughter had a thousand wooers;    Then well one more may fair Bianca have.    And so she shall. Lucentio shall make one,    Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
Why do you look on us and shake your head,And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,If that our noble father were alive?
Is the day so young?
I prithee now, lead the way without any more talking. Trinculo, the king and all our company else being drowned, we will inherit here.   Here, bear my bottle. Fellow Trinculo, well fill him by and by again.
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.
Trinculo, run into no further danger. Interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, Ill turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stockfish of thee.
Do not torment me, prithee. Ill bring my wood home faster.
My shame and guilt confounds me.    Forgive me, Valentine:   if hearty sorrow    Be a sufficient ransom for offence,    I tender 't here;   I do as truly suffer    As e'er I did commit.
Your shafts of fortune, though they hurt you mortally,Yet glance full wanderingly on us.
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd:    I do repent me;   read not my name there    My heart is not confederate with my hand.
Cassio, my lord, hath killed a young VenetianCalled Roderigo.
Primo, secundo, tertio is a good play, and the old saying is, the third pays for all.   The triplex, sir, is a good tripping measure, or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mindone, two, three.
Let it alone, thou fool. It is but trash.
Sir, heres the door. This is Lucentios house.My fathers bears more toward the marketplace.Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
How fares my noble lord?
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster    Doth watch Biancas steps so narrowly,    'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage,    Which, once performed, let all the world say no,    Ill keep mine own despite of all the world.
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench.I love her ten times more than e'er I did. O, how I long to have some chat with her!
Well, I conceive.
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.
Ay, fool.
Have you thought onA place whereto you'll go?
Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius;    Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths:    Bid him repair to me, and bring with him    Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths;    Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are:    Tell him the emperor and the empress too    Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.    This do thou for my love; and so let him,    As he regards his aged father's life.
Here comes the lady. Oh, so light a foot    Will neer wear out the everlasting flint.    A lover may bestride the gossamers    That idles in the wanton summer air,    And yet not fall. So light is vanity.
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
How now, my dear Othello?Your dinner, and the generous islanders By you invited, do attend your presence.
Give ground, if you see him furious.
But jealous souls will not be answered so.    They are not ever jealous for the cause,    But jealous for theyre jealous.   It is a monster    Begot upon itself, born on itself.
You lie.
Oh, misery!
Your guest, then, madam:To be your prisoner should import offending;Which is for me less easy to commitThan you to punish.
As the moon does, by wanting light to give:But then renew I could not, like the moon;There were no suns to borrow of.
How now shall this be compassed?Canst thou bring me to th' party?
My lord?
O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook:This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
Whats the matter, dear?
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Here come our brothers.
This tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
Doubt not, my lord. Ill play the oratorAs if the golden fee for which I plead Were for myself. And so, my lord, adieu.
Where is that damnèd villain, Tranio,That faced and braved me in this matter so?
Dear lady
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
O, the gibbet-maker! he says that he hath takenthem down again, for the man must not be hanged tillthe next week.
No? Sayst me so, friend? What countryman?
[as LUCENTIO]  'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you.'Twill bring you gain or perish on the seas.
Excellent! Why, this is the best fooling when all is done.Now, a song.
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!
O thou Othello, thou was once so good,Fall'n in the practice of a cursèd slave,What shall be said to thee?
Despiteful tidings! O, unpleasing news!
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.
Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valor.   He is, indeed, sir, the most skillful, bloody, and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found inany part of Illyria.     Will you walk towards him? I will make your peace with him if I can.
Meantime God grants that we have need of you.    Our brother is imprisoned by your means,    Myself disgraced, and the nobility    Held in contempt, while great promotions    Are daily given to ennoble those    That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.
There's the fool hangs on your back already.
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!My husband say that she was false!
Go, go, up to the leads. The Lord Mayor knocks.
Pox on t! Ill not meddle with him.
I think it well, my lord.
Let him know't.
Thy brothers love, our duty, and thy faultsProvoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
I thank you, sir.
I will believe you by the syllableOf what you shall deliver. Yet, give me leave:How came you in these parts? where were you bred?
Your will be done:   this must my comfort be,    Sun that warms you here shall shine on me;    And those his golden beams to you here lent    Shall point on me and gild my banishment.
Even what it please my lord that shall become him.
Why, thou sayst true. It is a paltry cap,A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.I love thee well in that thou likst it not.
'Tis sure enough, an you knew how.    But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware:    The dam will wake; and, if she wind you once,    She's with the lion deeply still in league,    And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back,    And when he sleeps will she do what she list.    You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let it alone;    And, come, I will go get a leaf of brass,    And with a gad of steel will write these words,    And lay it by:   the angry northern wind    Will blow these sands, like Sibyl's leaves, abroad,    And where's your lesson, then?   Boy, what say you?
Thou didst speak but well    When most the truth; which I receive much better    Than to be pitied of thee.   Prithee, bring me    To the dead bodies of my queen and son:    One grave shall be for both: upon them shall    The causes of their death appear, unto    Our shame perpetual.   Once a day I'll visit    The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there    Shall be my recreation: so long as nature    Will bear up with this exercise, so long    I daily vow to use it.   Come and lead me    Unto these sorrows.
O, break, my heart, poor bankrupt, break at once!    To prison, eyes, neer look on liberty.    Vile earth, to earth resign. End motion here,    And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.
I am Christophero Sly. Call not me Honor nor Lordship.   I ne'er drank sack in my life. An if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef.   Ne'er ask me what raiment Ill wear, for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor nomore shoes than feet,   nay sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.
Come hither, boy; come, come, and learn of us    To melt in showers: thy grandsire loved thee well:    Many a time he danced thee on his knee,    Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow:    Many a matter hath he told to thee,    Meet and agreeing with thine infancy;    In that respect, then, like a loving child,    Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring,    Because kind nature doth require it so:    Friends should associate friends in grief and woe:    Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave;    Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.
Excellent! I smell a device.
Ill believe both    And what does else want credit, come to me,    And Ill be sworn tis true.   Travelers ne'er did lie,    Though fools at home condemn 'em.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you hadbut looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.
All men I hope live so.
I know not that, but such a handkerchiefI am sure it was your wifesdid I todaySee Cassio wipe his beard with.
Fetch t, let me see t.
Hush, my gentle neighbours!    Lend me your hands; to the next chamber bear her.    Get linen: now this matter must be look'd to,    For her relapse is mortal. Come, come;    And AEsculapius guide us!
I tell you, denied, my lord.
What would you have me do? go to the wars, would    you?   where a man may serve seven years for the loss    of a leg, and have not money enough in the end to    buy him a wooden one?
Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. But what talk I of this?   Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest.   Let their heads be slickly combed, their blue coats brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit.   Let them curtsy with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my masters horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?
Nay, come, Kate, come. You must not look so sour.
No, my profound heart. And yet, by the very fangs of malice I swear, I am not that I play. Are you the lady of the house?
With who?
Let us make the assay upon him: if he care notfor't, he will supply us easily; if he covetouslyreserve it, how shall's get it?
No.
Patience, I pray you! 'Twas a fault unwilling.
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,    Of the young prince your son.   Send straight for him.    Let him be crowned. In him your comfort lives.    Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edwards grave    And plant your joys in living Edwards throne.
[aside]  Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet;Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
Good night, good Captain Blunt.
I mean, an we be in choler, well draw.
Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.
[Within]  What ho, my liege! for God's sake,let me in.
What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
Beguiled, divorcèd, wrongèd, spited, slain!    Most detestable Death, by thee beguiled,    By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!    O love! O life! Not life, but love in death.
Trembled and shook, for why he stamped and swore    As if the vicar meant to cozen him.    But after many ceremonies done,    He calls for wine. A health! quoth he, as if    He had been aboard, carousing to his mates    After a storm;   quaffed off the muscatel    And threw the sops all in the sextons face,    Having no other reason    But that his beard grew thin and hungerly    And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking.    This done, he took the bride about the neck    And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack    That at the parting all the church did echo.    And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame,    And after me, I know, the rout is coming.    Such a mad marriage never was before.
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for you    I know you think to dine with me today    And have prepared great store of wedding cheer,    But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,    And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
But, my daughter,Say you the like to him?
This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.
He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby a bloody coxcomb too. For the love of God, your help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.
Torments will ope your lips.
What with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
Nay, thats not your way.
Come, come,Youll never meet a more sufficient man.
Lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue tothe history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so nearwith their lips that their breaths embraced together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo!   When these mutabilities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main exercise, th' incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me. I have brought you from Venice.Watch you tonight for the command, Ill lay t upon you. Cassio knows you not.   Ill not be far from you. Do you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which the time shall more favorably minister.
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!    He is not lolling on a lewd love bed,    But on his knees at meditation;    Not dallying with a brace of courtesans,    But meditating with two deep divines;    Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,    But praying, to enrich his watchful soul.    Happy were England would this virtuous prince    Take on his grave the sovereignty thereof.    But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.
Thou knowst the mask of night is on my face,    Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek    For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.    Fain would I dwell on form. Fain, fain deny    What I have spoke. But farewell compliment!    Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say ay,    And I will take thy word. Yet if thou swearst    Thou mayst prove false.   At lovers perjuries,    They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,    If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.    Or if thou thinkst I am too quickly won,    Ill frown and be perverse and say thee nay,    So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world.    In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,    And therefore thou mayst think my havior light.    But trust me, gentleman, Ill prove more true    Than those that have more coying to be strange.    I should have been more strange, I must confess,    But that thou overheardst, ere I was ware,    My true loves passion.   Therefore pardon me,    And not impute this yielding to light love,    Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Come, my gracious lord,Shall I be your playfellow?
O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy   !    O loyal father of a treacherous son!    Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,    From when this stream through muddy passages    Hath held his current and defiled himself!    Thy overflow of good converts to bad,    And thy abundant goodness shall excuse    This deadly blot in thy digressing son.
An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.
Well, what was yours?
Nay, yet theres more in this.    I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings,    As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts    The worst of words.
Talk not to me, for Ill not speak a word.Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
They give this greeting to the citadel.This likewise is a friend.
I do not like the office.    But, sith I am entered in this cause so far,    Pricked to t by foolish honesty and love,    I will go on.   I lay with Cassio lately    And, being troubled with a raging tooth,    I could not sleep. There are a kind of men    So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter    Their affairs.   One of this kind is Cassio.    In sleep I heard him say Sweet Desdemona,    Let us be wary, let us hide our loves.    And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,    Cry O sweet creature! and then kiss me hard,    As if he plucked up kisses by the roots    That grew upon my lips,   lay his leg    Over my thigh, and sigh, and kiss, and then    Cry Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,Or how stolen from the dead.
All to you. Lights, more lights!
Ill after him, and see the event of this.
What mean'st thou, Aaron? wherefore didst thou this?
Ha!
Call'st thou that harm?
Not a hair perished.    On their sustaining garments not a blemish,    But fresher than before.   And, as thou badest me,    In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.    The kings son have I landed by himself,    Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs    In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,    His arms in this sad knot.
Descend, and keep your words.
Oh, twas a din to fright a monsters ear,    To make an earthquake!   Sure, it was the roar    Of a whole herd of lions.
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;    Here cousin:    On this side my hand, and on that side yours.    Now is this golden crown like a deep well    That owes two buckets, filling one another,    The emptier ever dancing in the air,    The other down, unseen and full of water:    That bucket down and full of tears am I,    Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
There!
Blistered be thy tongue    For such a wish! He was not born to shame.    Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,    For tis a throne where honor may be crowned.    Sole monarch of the universal earth,    Oh, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong    To strive for that which resteth in my choice.    I am no breeching scholar in the schools.    Ill not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times    But learn my lessons as I please myself.    And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down.    [To HORTENSIO]    Take you your instrument, play you the whiles.    His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
An t be any way, it must be with valor, for policy I hate. I had as lief be a Brownist as a politician.
Gods wrong is most of all.    If thou didst fear to break an oath by Him,    The unity the king my husband made    Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.    If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him,    Th' imperial metal circling now thy head    Had graced the tender temples of my child,    And both the princes had been breathing here,    Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,    Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.    What canst thou swear by now?
Fie, that youll say so! He plays o' the viol-de-gamboys,   and speaks three or four languages wordfor word without book,   and hath all the good gifts of nature.
(  aside  )  What relish is in this? How runs the stream?    Or I am mad, or else this is a dream.    Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep.    If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
I'll tell you more anon. Here's a noble feast toward.
Why dost thou spit at me?
I am not mad, Sir Topas. I say to you this house is dark.
Never, my lord. Therefore prepare to die.
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days    Which here you urge to prove us enemies,    We followed then our lord, our sovereign king.    So should we you, if you should be our king.
She says your Worship means to make a puppet of her.
Now heres another discontented paper    Found in his pocket too, and this,   it seems,    Roderigo meant to have sent this damnèd villain    But that, belike, Iago in the interim    Came in and satisfied him.
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.    But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,    To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,    And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover    What power the Duke of York had levied there;    Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.
True, madam. And, to comfort you with chance,    Assure yourself, after our ship did split,    When you and those poor number saved with you    Hung on our driving boat,   I saw your brother,    Most provident in peril, bind himself,    Courage and hope both teaching him the practice,    To a strong mast that lived upon the sea,    Where, like Arion on the dolphins back,    I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves    So long as I could see.
(to IAGO)     O Spartan dog,    More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,    Look on the tragic loading of this bed.    This is thy work. The object poisons sight,    Let it be hid.   Gratiano, keep the house    And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,    For they succeed on you.   T   o you, lord governor,    Remains the censure of this hellish villain:    The time, the place, the torture. Oh, enforce it!    Myself will straight aboard, and to the state    This heavy act with heavy heart relate.
Bushy, what news?
But he will not entreat his son for us.
Are you three usurers' men?
Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.
Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life.
Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone.Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice!Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend!
Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,Here Aaron is; and what with Aaron now?
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.Let's see your piece.
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long.I will deliver you or else lie for you.Meantime, have patience.
What you can make her do,I am content to look on: what to speak,I am content to hear; for 'tis as easyTo make her speak as move.
Why, anything. An honorable murderer, if you will,For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.
Urge neither charity nor shame to me.     [addressing the others]     Uncharitably with me have you dealt,    And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered.    My charity is outrage, life my shame,    And in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.
I mock you not, by heaven.Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.    I have been long a sleeper; but I trust    My absence doth neglect no great design    Which by my presence might have been concluded.
My lord.
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I havea kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, orany thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;that kills my heart.
My gracious lord,
These words become your lips as they passthorough them.
As if that name,    Shot from the deadly level of a gun,    Did murder her, as that names cursed hand    Murdered her kinsman.   O, tell me, Friar, tell me,    In what vile part of this anatomy    Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack    The hateful mansion.   [He draws his dagger]
[as LUCENTIO]   Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman.   Why, sir, what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father I am able to maintain it.
Bear with me, I am hungry for revenge,    And now I cloy me with beholding it.    Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward,    Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;    Young York, he is but boot, because both they    Matched not the high perfection of my loss.    Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward,    And the beholders of this frantic play,    Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,    Untimely smothered in their dusky graves.    Richard yet lives, hells black intelligencer,    Only reserved their factor to buy souls    And send them thither.   But at hand, at hand    Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.    Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray,    To have him suddenly conveyed from hence.    Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,    That I may live to say, The dog is dead.
A thousand pieces!
Why, boy, how is it?
Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more thanmy pack will hold.
Upon the stroke of four.
Come, sermon me no further:    No villanous bounty yet hath pass'd my heart;    Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.    Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack,    To think I shall lack friends?   Secure thy heart;    If I would broach the vessels of my love,    And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,    Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use    As I can bid thee speak.
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant? The goodness of the night upon you, friends!What is the news?
But did you ever tell him she was false?
What became of his bark and his followers?
Therefore, my lord, it highly us concerns    By day and night to attend him carefully,    And feed his humour kindly as we may,    Till time beget some careful remedy.
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
That sort was well fished for.
No, by this heavenly light!
The sooner, sweet, for you.
Look, how this ring encompasseth finger;    Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart.    Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.    And if thy poor devoted servant may    But beg one favor at thy gracious hand,    Thou dost confirm his happiness forever.
[to RIVERS]  Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Good, Peter, to hide her face, for her fans the fairerface.
If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.Diana, aid my purpose!
'Twould be too tedious to repeat;But the main grief springs from the lossOf a beloved daughter and a wife.
Sir, I have not you by the hand.
Go you, Malvolio. If it be a suit from the count, I am sick, or not at home.   What you will, to dismiss it.
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justiceProve violence; in the which three great ones suffer,Yourself, your queen, your son.
You were kneeled to and importuned otherwise    By all of us, and the fair soul herself    Weighed between loathness and obedience, at    Which end o' th' beam should bow.   We have lost your son,    I fear, forever. Milan and Naples have    More widows in them of this business' making    Than we bring men to comfort them.    The faults your own.
Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding    Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself    And you of her,   the bloody book of law    You shall yourself read in the bitter letter,    After your own sense, yea, though our proper son    Stood in your action.
Work you, then.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
And he that hath commanded is our king.
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:The odds for high and low's alike.
Up.
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me.    Neither my place nor aught I heard of business    Hath raised me from my bed,   nor doth the general care    Take hold on me, for my particular grief    Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature    That it engluts and swallows other sorrows    And it is still itself.
But didst thou see them dead?
Good Mistress Mary Accost
Ay, but this answer will not serve.
So dear I loved the man that I must weep.    I took him for the plainest harmless creature    That breathed upon this earth a Christian;    Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded    The history of all her secret thoughts.    So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue    That, his apparent open guilt omitted    I mean his conversation with Shores wife    He lived from all attainder of suspects.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.    The curfew bell hath rung. Tis three oclock.    Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.    Spare not for the cost.
My legs can keep no measure in delight,    When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:    Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.
Vent my folly? He has heard that word of some great man and now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly!     I am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a cockney.   I prithee now, ungird thy strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to my lady. Shall I vent to her that thou art coming?
And let them die that age and sullens have;For both hast thou, and both become the grave.
Be it so, then:    Yet none does know, but you, how she came dead,    Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.    She did disdain my child, and stood between    Her and her fortunes: none would look on her,    But cast their gazes on Marina's face;    Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin    Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through;    And though you call my course unnatural,    You not your child well loving, yet I find    It greets me as an enterprise of kindness    Perform'd to your sole daughter.
Thou weepest to make them drink, Timon.
Thou know'st I do: I call'd thee by thy name.
But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy billow kissthe moon, I care not.
Therefore, Timon,
If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before my lady.   He will come to her in yellow stockings, and tis a color she abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests.   And he will smileupon her, which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a melancholy as she i   s, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt. If you will see it, follow me.
Look to the lady; O, she's but o'erjoy'd.    Early in blustering morn this lady was    Thrown upon this shore.   I oped the coffin,    Found there rich jewels; recover'd her, and placed her    Here in Diana's temple.
Ay, tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a dun-colored stock. Shall we set about some revels?
[To LUCILIUS]  Love you the maid?
And till the tears that she hath shed for theeLike envious floods o'errun her lovely face,She was the fairest creature in the world And yet she is inferior to none.
One of these is true:I think affliction may subdue the cheek,But not take in the mind.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
O, you give me ill counsel.
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen.
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,    Be you beneath the sky.    [Aside]   I am angling now,    Though you perceive me not how I give line.    Go to, go to!    How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!    And arms her with the boldness of a wife    To her allowing husband!    [Exeunt POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and Attendants]    Gone already!    Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and    ears a fork'd one!    Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I    Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue    Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour    Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.    There have been,    Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;    And many a man there is, even at this present,    Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,    That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence    And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by    Sir Smile, his neighbour:   nay, there's comfort in't    Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,    As mine, against their will. Should all despair    That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind    Would hang themselves.   Physic for't there is none;    It is a bawdy planet, that will strike    Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,    From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,    No barricado for a belly; know't;    It will let in and out the enemy    With bag and baggage: many thousand on's    Have the disease, and feel't not.   How now, boy!
My lord, your promise for the earldom
No, nor look'd on us.
How dost thou feel thyself now?
Content. Whats the wager?
Sir, a word ere you go. Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
Monday! Ha, ha. Well, Wednesday is too soon,    O Thursday let it be.O Thursday, tell her,    She shall be married to this noble earl.    Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?    Well keep no great ado, a friend or two.    For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,    It may be thought we held him carelessly,    Being our kinsman, if we revel much.    Therefore well have some half a dozen friends,    And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.    What, did he marry me to famish me?    Beggars that come unto my fathers door    Upon entreaty have a present alms.    If not, elsewhere they meet with charity.    But I, who never knew how to entreat,    Nor never needed that I should entreat,    Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,    With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed.    And that which spites me more than all these wants,    He does it under name of perfect love,    As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,    'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.    I prithee, go and get me some repast,    I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
'Save his majesty!
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for oursheep-shearing.
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
I' th' commonwealth I would by contraries    Execute all things. For no kind of traffic    Would I admit. No name of magistrate.    Letters should not be known. Riches, poverty,    And use of servicenone. Contract, succession,    Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyardnone.    No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil.    No occupation. All men idle, all.    And women too, but innocent and pure.    No sovereignty
With mine officer!
The town is empty. On the brow o' th' sea Stand ranks of people, and they cry A sail!
Be one of those that think    The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence,    And open this to Pericles.   I do shame    To think of what a noble strain you are,    And of how coward a spirit.
You have, my lord. Would it might please your Grace, On our entreaties, to amend your fault.
Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry    But twas thy beauty that provokèd me.    Nay, now dispatch; twas I that stabbed young Edward    But twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her.
I must obey.    (t      o    VIOLA     )    This comes with seeking you:    But theres no remedy. I shall answer it  .  What will you do, now my necessity    Makes me to ask you for my purse?   It grieves me    Much more for what I cannot do for you    Than what befalls myself.   You stand amazed,    But be of comfort.
You or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. I tell you what you shall do. Our generals wife is now the general. I may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and graces.   Confess yourself freely to her, importune her help to put you inyour place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested.   This broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming,this crack of your love shall grow stronger than it wasbefore.
Certain: Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and    Timandra had gold of him:   he likewise enriched poor    straggling soldiers with great quantity: 'tis said    he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.
Katherine, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
Carry his water to the wisewoman.
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, lets go.
Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
E'en as Apemantus does now; hate a lord with my heart.
A good note, that keeps you from the blow of the law.
A messenger from the galleys.
Return them, we are ready; and our daughter,    In honour of whose birth these triumphs are,    Sits here, like beauty's child, whom nature gat    For men to see, and seeing wonder at.
Et vous aussi. Votre serviteur!
What is the fourth?
Do not deny to him that you love me.
It becomes thy oath full well,Thou to me thy secrets tell.
We wait upon your Grace.
No, as I am a Christian.    If to preserve this vessel for my lord    From any other foul unlawful touch    Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
Say that I did all this for love of her.
Her natural posture!    Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed    Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she    In thy not chiding, for she was as tender    As infancy and grace.   But yet, Paulina,    Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing    So aged as this seems.
Past question, for thou seest it will not curl by nature.
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thoushalt hear; 'tis in three parts.
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
I thank you. Here comes the count.
Some achieve greatness
Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury. Thou art on thy deathbed.
Well, well, he was the covertst sheltered traitor Thatever lived.     [to the MAYOR]    Would you imagine, or almost believe,    Were t not that by great preservation    We live to tell it,   that subtle traitor    This day had plotted, in the council house    To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?
Heaven keep the monster from Othellos mind!
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
[to STEPHANO]  Lo, lo, again! Bite him to death, I prithee.
No.
I am Pericles of Tyre: but tell me now    My drown'd queen's name, as in the rest you said    Thou hast been godlike perfect,    The heir of kingdoms and another like    To Pericles thy father.
A hornèd mans a monster and a beast.
Go to my steward.
He hath not told us of the captain yet.    When that is known and golden time convents,    A solemn combination shall be made    Of our dear souls.   Meantime, sweet sister,    We will not part from hence.   Cesario, come,    For so you shall be, while you are a man.    But when in other habits you are seen,    Orsinos mistress and his fancys queen.
(sings) O no, no, no, no, you dare not.
He did not call, hes busy in the paper.Is there division twixt my lord and Cassio?
Ay, past all surgery.
The Mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear;    Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit.    And look you get a prayer book in your hand    And stand between two churchmen, good my lord,    For on that ground Ill make a holy descant  .  And be not easily won to our requests.    Play the maids part: still answer nay, and take it.
You have often    Begun to tell me what I am,   but stopped    And left me to a bootless inquisition,    Concluding, Stay. Not yet.
In thy foul throat thou liest.   Queen Margaret saw    Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood,    The which thou once didst bend against her breast,    But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
Hark, now I hear them.
And only in that safety died her brothers.
South-west.
No, not these twenty years.
Me too, let me go thither.
What, are you both agreed?
That's a deed thou'lt die for.
Will you enforce me to a world of cares?    Call them again.   I am not made of stones,    But penetrable to your kind entreaties,    Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.
[within]  My lord , my lord! What, ho! My lord, my lord!
Well, I must leave her company.
Upon my soul,'tis true, sir.
Within this half hour will he be asleep. Wilt thou destroy him then?
Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,    Who would believe that there were mountaineers    Dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em    Wallets of flesh,   or that there were such men    Whose heads stood in their breasts?which now we find    Each putter-out of five for one will bring us    Good warrant of.
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw thesesights: the men are not yet cold under water, northe bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at itnow.
Oh, widow Dido? Ay, widow Dido.
Commend me to thy lady.
No remedy.Have you done there?
My lord Sebastian,    The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness    And time to speak it in.   You rub the sore    When you should bring the plaster.
And for I know she taketh most delight    In music, instruments, and poetry,    Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,    Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,    Or, Signior Gremio, you know any such,    Prefer them hither,   for to cunning men    I will be very kind, and liberal    To mine own children in good bringing up.   And so farewell.Katherina, you may stay,For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Why, do 'e take it, and the gods give thee good on't!
I will, my lord.
(aside]   Oh, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful    In the contempt and anger of his lip!    A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon    Than love that would seem hid. Loves night is noon.    [To   VIOLA]   Cesario, by the roses of the spring,    By maidhood, honor, truth, and everything,    I love thee so,   that, maugre all thy pride,    Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.    Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,    For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause,    But rather reason thus with reason fetter.    Love sought is good, but given unsought better.
No, indeed, my lord.
Blue, my lord.
You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
Oh, fie upon thee, strumpet!
I confess two sleeves.
What a blow was there given!
O my liege,    Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased    Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.    Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands    The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?    Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?    Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?    Did not the one deserve to have an heir?    Is not his heir a well-deserving son?    Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time    His charters and his customary rights;    Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;    Be not thyself; for how art thou a king    But by fair sequence and succession?    Now, afore GodGod forbid I say true!    If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,    Call in the letters patent that he hath    By his attorneys-general to sue    His livery, and deny his offer'd homage,    You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,    You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts    And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts    Which honour and allegiance cannot think.
No?Here comes my daughter, she can witness it.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
[aside]  Peace, sirrah.
Thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.
[To MARINA]  First, I would have you note, this isan honourable man.
Why, in good time.
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonightHave my old feet stumbled at graves!Whos there?
[as LUCENTIO]   If it be so, sir, that you are the man    Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest,    And if you break the ice and do this feat,    Achieve the elder, set the younger free    For our access,   whose hap shall be to have her    Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
See, where he comes. So please you, step aside.Ill know his grievance or be much denied.
So could I too.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort    Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly    And prays the Moor be safe.   For they were parted    With foul and violent tempest.
Get you hence, for I must goWhere it fits not you to know.
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.    I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king;    Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:    Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove    A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
Very foul.
Here, kiss the book. Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a goose.
[To SIR TOBY BELCH]  No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.
Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremasterand a knave; which not-withstanding, thou shalt beno less esteemed.
God be with you. I have done.    Please it your grace, on to the state affairs.    I had rather to adopt a child than get it.    Come hither, Moor.    I here do give thee that with all my heart    Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart    I would keep from thee.   For your sake, jewel,    I am glad at soul I have no other child.    For thy escape would teach me tyranny,    To hang clogs on them.   I have done, my lord.
I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.
Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of entertainment.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords.Heres my fiddlestick. Heres that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
Sir, my liege,    Do not infest your mind with beating on    The strangeness of this business.   At picked leisure    Which shall be shortly, single Ill resolve you    Which to you shall seem probableof every    These happened accidents.   Till when, be cheerful    And think of each thing well.     [aside to ARIEL]    Come hither, spirit.    Set Caliban and his companions free.    Untie the spell.
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot    Which ne'er I did remember:   to my knowledge,    I never in my life did look on him.
Oh, bloody period!
[To VIOLA and attendants]    Stand you a while aloof.   [To VIOLA]   Cesario,    Thou knowst no less but all. I have unclasped    To thee the book even of my secret soul.    Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her;    Be not denied access, stand at her doors,    And tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow    Till thou have audience.
My friend is dead,'Tis done at your request. But let her live.
Welcome, my gracious lord; welcome, dread queen;    Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius;    And welcome, all: although the cheer be poor,    'Twill fill your stomachs; please you eat of it.
Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.
Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?
My lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.
I am bound to your niece, sir. I mean, she is the list of my voyage.
Have I, Malvolio? No.
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I amfalse of heart that way; and that he knew, I warranthim.
An if I be, sir, is it any offense?
No, good sir;He has his health and ampler strength indeedThan most have of his age.
Look you, here comes my mistress' page.
Here, my good lord.
How now, Lord Stanley, whats the news?
Oh, monstrous! Monstrous!
She is spread of lateInto a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,    That they which brought me in my masters hate,    I live to look upon their tragedy.    Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older    Ill send some packing that yet think not on t.
O Dionyza,    Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it,    Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?    Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep    Our woes into the air; our eyes do weep,    Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder;    That, if heaven slumber while their creatures want,    They may awake their helps to comfort them.    I'll then discourse our woes, felt several years,    And wanting breath to speak help me with tears.
Holla! Stand there!
Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
As you have said, my lord.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Is he come?
Good night, honest Iago.
Then I repent not.
Thats fouler.
Carlisle, this is your doom:    Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,    More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;    So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:    For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,    High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.
I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?
What, art thou waking?
Why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the clerestories toward the south-north are as lustrous as ebony.   And yet complainest thou of obstruction?
If? Thou protector of this damnèd strumpet,    Talkst thou to me of ifs? Thou art a traitor    Off with his head. Now by Saint Paul I swear    I will not dine until I see the same.    Lovell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done.    The rest that love me, rise and follow me.
I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray nowWhat colour are your eyebrows?
(  aside  ) Oh, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!
How, my lord!What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?
O Helicanus, strike me, honour'd sir;    Give me a gash, put me to present pain;    Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me    O'erbear the shores of my mortality,    And drown me with their sweetness   .   O, come hither,    Thou that beget'st him that did thee beget;    Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus,    And found at sea again!   O Helicanus,    Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud    As thunder threatens us: this is Marina.    What was thy mother's name? tell me but that,    For truth can never be confirm'd enough,    Though doubts did ever sleep.
I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrament, but nothing of the circumstance more.
Long live she so. And long live you to think so.
By thy approach thou makest me most unhappy.
And, for that dowry, Ill assure her of    Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,    In all my lands and leases whatsoever.    Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,    That covenants may be kept on either hand.
Of very ill manner. Hell speak with you, will you or no.
Come, Montague, for thou art early upTo see thy son and heir now early down.
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.
Roderigo!
My mother was the daughter of a king;    Who died the minute I was born,    As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft    Deliver'd weeping.
Oh, fie upon them! Some such squire he was That turned your wit the seamy side withoutAnd made you to suspect me with the Moor.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil.    The gravity and stillness of your youth    The world hath noted, and your name is great    In mouths of wisest censure.   Whats the matter    That you unlace your reputation thus    And spend your rich opinion for the name    Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
(t      o    VIOLA     )    Theres no remedy, sir; he will fight with you for s oath sake.   Marry, he hath better bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of.   Therefore, draw for the supportance ofhis vow. He protests he will not hurt you.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynards Castle,Where you shall find me well accompaniedWith reverend fathers and well-learnèd bishops.
Stop there, stop there.
Nay, I'll be patient.Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me,To call thyself Marina.
Who calls so loud?
A more satiety of commendations.If I should pay you for't as 'tis extoll'd,It would unclew me quite.
No, noble mistress. 'Tis fresh morning with me    When you are by at night. I do beseech you    Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers    What is your name?
Half-part, mates, half-part.Come, let's have her aboard suddenly.
It is a pretty mocking of the life.Here is a touch; is't good?
(  t    o  VIOLA   )   Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love,    In the sweet pangs of it remember me;    For such as I am, all true lovers are,    Unstaid and skittish in all motions else    Save in the constant image of the creature    That is beloved.   How dost thou like this tune?
I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine woman! A fair woman! A sweet woman!
So prosper I as I swear perfect love.
Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
Where is the king?
Hearst thou, Biondello?
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,    That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have    Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought    The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd    Of great Apollo's priest;   and that, since then,    You have not dared to break the holy seal    Nor read the secrets in't.
I would you had been by the ship side, to havehelped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.
I'll show you how to observe a strange event.Your lord sends now for money.
Here he comes with your niece. Give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.
(  aside  ) 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue!
Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
No, as I shall be saved.
Grandam, we can, for my good uncle Gloucester    Told me the king, provoked to it by the queen,    Devised impeachments to imprison him;    And when my uncle told me so, he wept,    And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek,    Bade me rely on him as on my father,    And he would love me dearly as a child.
Go, take it up unto thy masters use.
Is t come to this?
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
Your bidding shall I do effectually.
Good morrow, Father.
The Lord protect him from that kingly title! Hath he set bounds between their love and me?I am their mother. Who shall bar me from them?
Faith, he is gone unto the taming school.
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
Every man here's so. What would he have borrowed ofyou?
May it please your honour, my lord hath sent
I had forgot theeOh, come in, Emilia.Soft, by and by. Let me the curtains draw.Where art thou?
These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes;    And they have seized Marina. Let her go:    There's no hope she will return.   I'll swear    she's dead,    And thrown into the sea. But I'll see further:    Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her,    Not carry her aboard. If she remain,    Whom they have ravish'd must by me be slain.
Attends he here, or no? Lucilius!
Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune,    And will awake him from his melancholy.    Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,    And waste the time, which looks for other revels.    Even in your armours, as you are address'd,    Will very well become a soldier's dance.    I will not have excuse, with saying this    Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads,    Since they love men in arms as well as beds.
How's this? how's this? Some more; be sage.
Should I now meet my father,He would not call me son.
Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?
O my poor father!The heaven sets spies upon us, will not haveOur contract celebrated.
[To STEPHANO]  Ill swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject, for the liquor is not earthly.
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:    I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,    Because my power is weak and all ill left:    But if I could, by Him that gave me life,    I would attach you all and make you stoop    Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;    But since I cannot, be it known to you    I do remain as neuter.   So, fare you well;    Unless you please to enter in the castle    And there repose you for this night.
Yet pause awhile:    Yon knight doth sit too melancholy,    As if the entertainment in our court    Had not a show might countervail his worth.    Note it not you, Thaisa?
Shrouded in cloth of state; balm'd and entreasured    With full bags of spices! A passport too!    Apollo, perfect me in the characters!     [Reading from a scroll]     'Here I give to understand,    If e'er this coffin drive a-land,    I, King Pericles, have lost    This queen, worth all our mundane cost.    Who finds her, give her burying;    She was the daughter of a king:    Besides this treasure for a fee,    The gods requite his charity!'    If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart    That even cracks for woe! This chanced tonight.
Why do the emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
Ay, that I will. And Ill be wise hereafter    And seek for grace.   What a thrice-double ass    Was I, to take this drunkard for a god    And worship this dull fool!
Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.    Why should you want?   Behold, the earth hath roots;    Within this mile break forth a hundred springs;    The oaks bear mast, the briers scarlet hips;    The bounteous housewife, nature, on each bush    Lays her full mess before you. Want! why want?
Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see:if you like her, so; if not, I have lost my earnest.
[to STEPHANO]  Ill show thee every fertile inch o' th' island.And I will kiss thy foot. I prithee, be my god.
[to ANNE]  Come, madam, come. I in all haste was sent.
I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant: my    mistress is one, and I am her fool.   When men come    to borrow of your masters, they approach sadly, and    go away merry; but they enter my mistress' house    merrily, and go away sadly: the reason of this?
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.
Pardon, dear father.
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio,This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not.Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.
[to ANTONIO]  One. Tell.
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy    and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to    him, though removed fifty times, shall all come    under the hangman:   which though it be great pity,    yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a    ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into    grace!   Some say he shall be stoned; but that death    is too soft for him, say I draw our throne into a    sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
Then never trust me if I be afeard.
Hidst thou that forehead with a golden crown    Where should be branded, if that right were right,    The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown    And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?    Tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?
And mine, with my heart in t. And now farewellTill half an hour hence.
Why, may one ask?
Indeed, my lord,If I had thought the sight of my poor imageWould thus have wrought you,for the stone is mineI'ld not have show'd it.
A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?
His bark is stoutly timbered and his pilot    Of very expert and approved allowance    Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,    Stand in bold cure.
You must away tonight.
Marry, sir, half a day's journey: and I'll tell    you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is her    birth-day;   and there are princes and knights come    from all parts of the world to just and tourney for herlove.
A parlous boy! Go to, you are too shrewd.
'Sblood, but youll not hear me!  If ever I did dream of such a matter, abhor me.
Catesby.
To have no screen between this part he played    And him he played it for, he needs will be    Absolute Milan.   Me, poor man, my library    Was dukedom large enough.   Of temporal royalties    He thinks me now incapable, confederates    So dry he was for swaywi' th' King of Naples    To give him annual tribute, do him homage,    Subject his coronet to his crown and bend    The dukedom yet unbowed   alas, poor Milan!    To most ignoble stooping.
He loves you well that holds his life of you.
Canst thou catch any fishes, then?
Marshal, demand of yonder champion    The cause of his arrival here in arms:    Ask him his name and orderly proceed    To swear him in the justice of his cause.
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in sopreposterous estate as we are.
Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, weshould lodge them with this sign.
So longest way shall have the longest moans.
Certainly, sir, I can.
O, thou well-skilled in curses, stay awhile,And teach me how to curse mine enemies.
Went he hence now?
What is that?
So she does any thing; though I report it,That should be silent: if young DoriclesDo light upon her, she shall bring him thatWhich he not dreams of.
Alack, my lord, what do you mean by that?
Go to, farewell.Do you hear, Roderigo?
The devil a puritan that he is, or anything constantly,but a time-pleaser;   an affectioned ass that cons state without book and utters it by great swarths;   the best persuaded of himself, so crammed, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith that all that look on him love him.   And on that vice in him will my revenge find notable cause to work.
This is Illyria, lady.
Performance shall follow.
[giving money to the   FOOL   ]   Theres a testril of me too. If one knight give a
'Tis such another fitchew. Marry, a perfumed one.What do you mean by this haunting of me?
No, pray thee.     [aside]    I must obey. His art is of such power,    It would control my dams god, Setebos,    And make a vassal of him.
Why, how now, general? No more of that.
Alas, he is betrayed and I undone.
I know they do, and I have well deserved it.
Though this island seem to be desert
I'll hunt with him; and let them be received,Not without fair reward.
It may be so; but yet my inward soul    Persuades me it is otherwise:   howe'er it be,    I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad    As, though on thinking on no thought I think,    Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
My lord, your son was gone before I came.
O you gods!    Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,    And snatch them straight away?   We here below    Recall not what we give, and therein may    Use honour with you.
[as VINCENTIO]  Thou liest. His father is come from Padua and here looking out at the window.
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
My prayers, minx?
Let me have open means to come to them,And soon Ill rid you from the fear of them.
Have you forgot me, sir?
Go.
I longTo hear the story of your life, which mustTake the ear strangely.
Farewell!I will omit no opportunityThat may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
We talk here in the public haunt of men.    Either withdraw unto some private place,    And reason coldly of your grievances,    Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
No doubt, my lord.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,    Herself poised with herself in either eye.    But in that crystal scales let there be weighed    Your ladys love against some other maid    That I will show you shining at the feast,    And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
Alas, alas!    It is not honesty in me to speak    What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,    And his own courses will denote him so    That I may save my speech. Do but go after    And mark how he continues.
By his command    Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him    Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,    Can send his brother:   and, but infirmity    Which waits upon worn times hath something seized    His wish'd ability, he had himself    The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his    Measured to look upon you;   whom he loves    He bade me say somore than all the sceptres    And those that bear them living.
Whate'er it be,    'Tis wondrous heavy.   Wrench it open straight:    If the sea's stomach be o'ercharged with gold,    'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.
Ill fetch them, sir.
I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
O, she's warm! If this be magic, let it be an artLawful as eating.
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.
There is no more but so. Say it is done,And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
Heavens forgive it!
My words are dull. O, quicken them with thine!
Thy life answer!
'   Twill out, twill out.I peace?    No, I will speak as liberal as the north.    Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,    All, all cry shame against me, yet Ill speak.
How! not women?
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
Amen.
Whe'er thou beest he or no,    Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me,    As late I have been, I not know.   Thy pulse    Beats as of flesh and blood. And since I saw thee,    Th' affliction of my mind amends, with which    I fear a madness held me.   This must crave    An if this be at alla most strange story.    Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat    Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero    Be living and be here?
Not I, my lord.
Oh, hes drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone. His eyes were set at eight i' the morning.
[aside]   O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him.   How he jets under his advanced plumes!
Withdraw, my lord. Ill help you to a horse.
Twenty crowns.
Why, I cannot name't but I shall offend.
Thou chidst me oft for loving Rosaline.
What says your Highness to my just request?
Take him up gently, and to bed with him,And each one to his office when he wakes.
Now will not I deliver his letter, for the behavior of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacityand breeding. His employment between his lord and my niece confirms no less. Therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth.   He will find it comes from a clodpole. But, sir, I willdeliver his challenge by word of mouth, set upon Aguecheek a notable report of valor, and drive the gentleman (as I know his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity.   This will so fright them both that theywill kill one another by the look, like cockatrices.
O, sir, I can be modest.
I ne'er saw this before.Sure, theres some wonder in this handkerchief,I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
He smiled and said The better for our purpose.
Dieu vous garde, monsieur.
Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown.He sees thee not.
For mine own part,    I never tasted Timon in my life,    Nor came any of his bounties over me,    To mark me for his friend;   yet, I protest,    For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue    And honourable carriage,    Had his necessity made use of me,    I would have put my wealth into donation,    And the best half should have return'd to him,    So much I love his heart: but, I perceive,    Men must learn now with pity to dispense;    For policy sits above conscience.
Be't not in thy care; go,I charge thee, invite them all: let in the tideOf knaves once more; my cook and I'll provide.
If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.
Tush, I will stir about,    And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.    Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.    I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.    I'll play the housewife for this once.
And what should I do in Illyria?    My brother he is in Elysium.    Perchance he is not drownd.What think you, sailors?
Tis the way    To call hers exquisite, in question more.    These happy masks that kiss fair ladies brows,    Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.    He that is strucken blind cannot forget    The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.    Show me a mistress that is passing fair;    What doth her beauty serve but as a note    Where I may read who passed that passing fair?    Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Pray you, walk near: I'll speak with you anon.
How do you? What's the news?
What will you do with t, that you have been so earnestTo have me filch it?
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes    I see thy grieved heart:   thy sad aspect    Hath from the number of his banish'd years    Pluck'd four away.
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,    With that which he hath drunk tonight already,    Hell be as full of quarrel and offense    As my young mistress' dog.   Now my sick fool Roderigo,    Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out,    To Desdemona hath tonight caroused    Potations pottle-deep, and hes to watch.    Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits    (That hold their honors in a wary distance,    The very elements of this warlike isle)    Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups,    And they watch too.   Now mongst this flock of drunkards    Am I to put our Cassio in some action    That may offend the isle.   But here they come.    If consequence do but approve my dream    My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
Noble Sebastian,Thou letst thy fortune sleepdie, ratherwinkstWhiles thou art waking.
[as LUCENTIO]   Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.    Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,    Whatever fortune stays him from his word:    Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;    Though he be merry, yet withal hes honest.
A prize, a prize, a prize!
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,To mend her kissing with!
Soldiers, not thieves.
Thats not amiss, But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,I will obey thee. Helicanus!
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Oh, heaven! Oh, heavenly powers!
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight:    Bid him repair to us to Ely House    To see this business.   To-morrow next    We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow:    And we create, in absence of ourself,    Our uncle York lord governor of England;    For he is just and always loved us well.    Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;    Be merry, for our time of stay is short.
How canst thou woo her?
Get me some poison, Iago, this night. Ill not expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovidemy mind againThis night, Iago!
What should it be, that they shriek so abroad?
Thou hast undone our mother.
[To DESDEMONA]  I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this,Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
As many, worthy lady, to yourself:    According to your ladyship's impose,    I am thus early come to know what service    It is your pleasure to command me in.
Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears:    Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing    The close enacts and counsels of the heart!    Here's a young lad framed of another leer:    Look, how the black slave smiles upon the father,    As who should say 'Old lad, I am thine own.'    He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed    Of that self-blood that first gave life to you,    And from that womb where you imprison'd were    He is enfranchised and come to light:    Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,    Although my seal be stamped in his face.
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
We'll bring your grace e'en to the edge o' the shore,Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune andThe gentlest winds of heaven.
Do you hear, Cassio?
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
But how long shall that title ever last?
As you shall prove us, praise us.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment.    I do not so secure me in the error,    But the main article I do approve    In fearful sense.
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London    The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,    Two of the dangerous consorted traitors    That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.
[Aside]  Is she a Capulet?O dear account! My life is my foes debt.
Here, here, sir! Here, sir!
Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal emperor!
Yes, my good lord,    It doth contain a king; King Richard lies    Within the limits of yon lime and stone:    And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,    Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman    Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.
A boy?
But I'ld say he had not,And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,Howe'er you lean to the nayward.
After my death, the one half of my lands, And, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
Certain, men should be what they seem.
None!The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.
I go, my lord.
I am thinking what I shall say I have provided for    him: it must be a personating of himself;   a satire    against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery    of the infinite flatteries that follow youth and opulency.
Yea, say you so?There shall not at your father's house theseseven yearsBe born another such.
He is as disproportioned in his manners    As in his shape.    [to CALIBAN]    Go, sirrah, to my cell.    Take with you your companions.   As you look    To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.
Then give me leave to go.
[to GONZALO]    My master through his art foresees the danger    That you, his friend, are, and sends me forth    For else his project diesto keep them living.     [sings in GONZALOs ear]      While you here do snoring lie,    Open-eyed conspiracy    His time doth take.    If of life you keep a care,    Shake off slumber and beware.    Awake! Awake!
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.
Traitor, thou liest.
Not I, I must be found.My parts, my title, and my perfect soulShall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
What, my lord?
I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.
This your requestIs altogether just: therefore bring forth,And in Apollos name, his oracle.
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
To answer by the method, in the first of his heart.
Come, say your prayers.
And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a sailor.
It is extempore, from my mother wit.
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here    I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,    If I do vow a friendship, Ill perform it    To the last article.   My lord shall never rest,    Ill watch him tame and talk him out of patience.    His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift,    Ill intermingle everything he does    With Cassios suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,    For thy solicitor shall rather die    Than give thy cause away.
Thou art proud, Apemantus.
(    aside    ) He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said, whisper! With as little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do, I will gyve thee in thine own courtship.   You say true, 'Tis so,indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are mostapt to play the sir in.   Very good, well kissed, and excellent courtesy! tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers to your lips? Would they were clyster-pipes foryour sake!
Call up my brotherOh, would you had had her!Some one way, some another. Do you knowWhere we may apprehend her and the Moor?
Can heaven be so envious?
Benedicite.    What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?    Young son, it argues a distempered head    So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.    Care keeps his watch in every old mans eye,    And where care lodges, sleep will never lie.    But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain    Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.    Therefore thy earliness doth me assure    Thou art uproused by some distemperature.    Or if not so, then here I hit it right:    Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
The trumpets show the emperor is at hand.
My lord,
Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel will amend. For give the dry fool drink, then is the fool notdry.   Bid the dishonest man mend himself. If he mend, heis no longer dishonest.   If he cannot, let the botcher mend him. Anything thats mended is but patched.   Virtue that transgresses is but patched with sin, and sin that amends is but patched with virtue.   If that this simple syllogism will serve, so. If it will not, what remedy?    As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so beautys a flower.   The lady bade take away the fool. Therefore, I say again, take her away.
Ah, he is young, and his minorityIs put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,A man that loves not me nor none of you.
And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.
'Tis conceived to scope.    This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,    With one man beckon'd from the rest below,    Bowing his head against the sleepy mount    To climb his happiness, would be well express'd    In our condition.
And what of all this?
Nay, then,    Do what thou canst, I will not go today,    No, nor tomorrow, not till I please myself.    The door is open, sir. There lies your way.    You may be jogging whiles your boots are green.    For me, Ill not be gone till I please myself.    'Tis like youll prove a jolly surly groom,    That take it on you at the first so roundly.
Madam.
Neither.
I fear it is too choleric a meat. How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?
I did not kill your husband.
Come, captain, will you go?
O me! This sight of death is as a bell,That warns my old age to a sepulcher.
Is whispering nothing?    Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?    Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career    Of laughing with a sigh?   a note infallible    Of breaking honestyhorsing foot on foot?    Skulking in corners?   wishing clocks more swift?    Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes    Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,    That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?    Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;    The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;    My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,    If this be nothing.
Carry this mad knave to the jail.Father Baptista,I charge you see that he be forthcoming.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
Iago, look with care about the town    And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.    Come, Desdemona, tis the soldiers' life    To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
You make me marvel: wherefore ere this time    Had you not fully laid my state before me,    That I might so have rated my expense,    As I had leave of means?
[To BIANCA]  What, look you pale?Oh, bear him out o' the air.
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
[to QUEEN MARGARET]  Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? no.
If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.
Why dost thou call them knaves? thou know'st them not.
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
What sayst thou, my dear Nurse?
And rich: here is a water, look ye.
I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.
How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture of WeThree?
And you too, sir.
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh.After the battle let George Stanley die.
How can this be?
Then he disdains to shine, for by the bookHe should have braved the east an hour ago A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliffe!
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know,    That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake    A married life.    Her reason to herself is only known,    Which yet from her by no means can I get.
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above And all good men of this ungoverned isle.
I met a courier, one mine ancient friend;    Whom, though in general part we were opposed,    Yet our old love made a particular force,    And made us speak like friends:   this man was riding    From Alcibiades to Timon's cave,    With letters of entreaty, which imported    His fellowship i' the cause against your city,    In part for his sake moved.
She was here even now. She haunts me in every place. I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes the bauble and, by this hand, she falls me thus about my neck
I am aweary. Give me leave awhile.Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!
Then there's my glove;    Descend, and open your uncharged ports:    Those enemies of Timon's and mine own    Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof    Fall and no more:   and, to atone your fears    With my more noble meaning, not a man    Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream    Of regular justice in your city's bounds,    But shall be render'd to your public laws    At heaviest answer.
Not your gaoler, then,But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question youOf my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:You were pretty lordings then?
How likes she my discourse?
I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control
Ha, ha, ha!
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
Orsino. I have heard my father name him. He was a bachelor then.
I humbly thank you fort.
O, why should nature build so foul a den,Unless the gods delight in tragedies?
Ay, madam.
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
My lord of York will still be cross in talk.Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.Call, good Mercutio.
Good morrow, good Lieutenant. I am sorry    For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.    The general and his wife are talking of it,    And she speaks for you stoutly.   The Moor replies    That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus    And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom    He might not but refuse you.   But he protests he loves you    And needs no other suitor but his likings    To take the safest occasion by the front    To bring you in again.
Sure, all's effectless; yet nothing we'll omit    That bears recovery's name.   But, since your kindness    We have stretch'd thus far, let us beseech you    That for our gold we may provision have,    Wherein we are not destitute for want,    But weary for the staleness.
Tell me, heavenly bow,    If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,    Do now attend the queen?   Since they did plot    The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,    Her and her blind boys scandaled company    I have forsworn.
With signs of war about his aged neck:    O, full of careful business are his looks!    Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
If you were born to honour, show it now;    If put upon you, make the judgment good    That thought you worthy of it.
He hath, my lord.
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,    boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things    dying, I with things newborn.   Here's a sight for    thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's    child!   look thee here; take up, take up, boy;    open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be    rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:    open't. What's within, boy?
Hes married.
Say then my peace is made.
A prize! a prize!
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
[To PAGE]  Lead, boy. Which way?
[as LUCENTIO]  Perhaps him and her, sir. What have you to do?
Come, mistress; come your ways with me.
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
(to OTHELLO)    You must forsake this room and go with us.    Your power and your command is taken off    And Cassio rules in Cyprus.   For this slave,    If there be any cunning cruelty    That can torment him much and hold him long,    It shall be his.   You shall close prisoner rest    Till that the nature of your fault be known    To the Venetian state.Come, bring him away.
Go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea.   Be subject    To no sight but thine and mine, invisible    To every eyeball else.   Go take this shape    And hither come in t. Go hence with diligence.
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
Well, God give her good rest! What hath he sent her?
To th' syllable.
Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.
The higher powers forbid!
I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear.    I wis it is not halfway to her heart.    But if it were, doubt not her care should be    To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool    And paint your face and use you like a fool.
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, shebeing once gone.
Ay, but he will not now be pacified. Fabian can scarcehold him yonder.
Then I must not say no.
Let be, let be.Would I were dead, but that, methinks, alreadyWhat was he that did make it? See, my lord,Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veinsDid verily bear blood?
Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha t.
Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak moreThat speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
Why so you are, my thrice-renownèd lord.
I heard nothing.
I thought of her,Even in these looks I made.  [To FLORIZEL]  But your petitionIs yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,I am friend to them and you: upon which errandI now go toward him; therefore follow meAnd mark what way I make: come, good my lord.
Lets take leave of him.
My matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.
'Zounds, ye whore! is black so base a hue?Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom, sure.
[as LUCENTIO]  Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
A senseless villain, good Hortensio. I bade the rascal knock upon your gateAnd could not get him for my heart to do it.
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
You shall not choose but drink before you go.I think I shall command your welcome here,And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.
I beseech your Graces both to pardon me.    His majesty hath straitly given in charge    That no man shall have private conference,    Of what degree soever, with his brother.
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy    You have desire to purchase,   and your store,    I think, is not for idle markets, sir.
Ay, madam.
But oh, how vile an idol proves this god!    Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.    In nature theres no blemish but the mind.    None can be called deformed but the unkind.    Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil    Are empty trunks o'erflourished by the devil.
More to knowDid never meddle with my thoughts.
Nay, heaven doth know.
The Counts gentleman, one Cesario. We took him for a coward, but hes the very devil incardinate.
[Aside]   I'll meet you at the turn. What a    god's gold,    That he is worshipp'd in a baser temple    Than where swine feed!    'Tis thou that rigg'st the bark and plough'st the foam,    Settlest admired reverence in a slave:    To thee be worship! and thy saints for aye    Be crown'd with plagues that thee alone obey!    Fit I meet them.
Come, other sorts offend as well as we.
[as LUCENTIO]  Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
My hopes do shape him for the governor.
[kneeling]  As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.
Be you quiet, monster.Mistress line, is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line.Now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin.
Flatter my sorrow with report of it.Tell me what state, what dignity, what honor,Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane;    But if the prince do live, let us salute him,    Or know what ground's made happy by his breath.    If in the world he live, we'll seek him out;    If in his grave he rest, we'll find him there;    And be resolved he lives to govern us,    Or dead, give's cause to mourn his funeral,    And leave us to our free election.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:the curses he shall have, the tortures he shallfeel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
I see the play so liesThat I must bear a part.
To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or,    If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,    Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining    From course required;   or else thou must be counted    A servant grafted in my serious trust    And therein negligent;   or else a fool    That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,    And takest it all for jest.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the wayand lost all my money?
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee    Doth much excuse the appertaining rage    To such a greeting.   Villain am I none.    Therefore, farewell. I see thou knowst me not.
'Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay.    The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd    And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;    The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth    And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;    Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,    The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,    The other to enjoy by rage and war:    These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.    Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,    As well assured Richard their king is dead.
[Gives ROMEO poison]  Put this in any liquid thing youwillAnd drink it off; and, if you had the strengthOf twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Yet be content.
My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart.
O heaven!
Heres Lucentio, right son to the right Vincentio,That have by marriage made thy daughter mineWhile counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
[Aside]  I know them all, though they suppose me mad,And will o'erreach them in their own devices:A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam!
Lead away.
No matter. Get thee gone, And hire those horses. Ill be with thee straight.
With the same 'havior that your passion bearsGoes on my masters grief.
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
Ah, my good friend, what cheer?
[Aside]   Nor more willingly leaves winter; such    summer-birds are men.   Gentlemen, our dinner will not    recompense this long stay: feast your ears with the    music awhile, if they will fare so harshly o' the    trumpet's sound; we shall to 't presently.
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband,I am your wife in all obedience.
What in the contrary?
Keep it, I cannot eat it.
It is determined, not concluded yet;But so it must be if the king miscarry.
The man grows mad. Away with him. Come, come, sir.
You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre,    I left behind an ancient substitute:    Can you remember what I call'd the man?    I have named him oft.
Construe them.
Ill wait upon your Lordship.
She will indite him to some supper.
Till now you have gone on and fill'd the time    With all licentious measure, making your wills    The scope of justice;   till now myself and such    As slept within the shadow of your power    Have wander'd with our traversed arms and breathed    Our sufferance vainly:   now the time is flush,    When crouching marrow in the bearer strong    Cries of itself 'No more:'   now breathless wrong    Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,    And pursy insolence shall break his wind    With fear and horrid flight.
So:    Thou wilt not hear me now; thou shalt not then:    I'll lock thy heaven from thee.    O, that men's ears should be    To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!
Nay, Ill come. If I lose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with melancholy.
Time to be honest.
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes.
My recompense is thanks, that's all;Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Now, fellows, you are welcome.
Prove me, my gracious lord.
Romeo will answer it.
[sings]      Full fathom five thy father lies.    Of his bones are coral made.    Those are pearls that were his eyes.    Nothing of him that doth fade,    But doth suffer a sea-change    Into something rich and strange.    Sea nymphs hourly ring his knell.
Her father is Baptista Minola,    An affable and courteous gentleman.    Her name is Katherina Minola,    Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.
What good is covered with the face of heaven,To be discovered, that can do me good?
Why, what should you fear?
Ah, cut my lace asunder that my pent heart May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon With this dead-killing news!
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thoumightst have hit upon it here: the commonwealth ofAthens is become a forest of beasts.
And therefore tis called a sensible tale. And this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech list'ning.Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress
Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.
My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,    Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,    Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,    The effects of sorrow for his valiant sons,    Whose loss hath pierced him deep and scarr'd his heart;    And rather comfort his distressed plight    Than prosecute the meanest or the best    For these contempts.     [Aside]     Why, thus it shall become    High-witted Tamora to gloze with all:    But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick,    Thy life-blood out: if Aaron now be wise,    Then is all safe, the anchor's in the port.
A callat    Of boundless tongue,   who late hath beat her husband    And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;    It is the issue of Polixenes:    Hence with it, and together with the dam    Commit them to the fire!
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.
What, must it, nurse? then let no man but IDo execution on my flesh and blood.
[Aside]  How! the king gone!
What, were you snarling all before I came,    Ready to catch each other by the throat,    And turn you all your hatred now on me?    Did Yorks dread curse prevail so much with heaven    That Henrys death, my Lovelly Edwards death,    Their kingdoms loss, my woeful banishment,    Could all but answer for that peevish brat?    Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?    Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!    Though not by war, by surfeit die your king,    As ours by murder to make him a king.     [to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales,    For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,    Die in his youth by like untimely violence.    Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,    Outlive they glory, like my wretched self.    Long mayst thou live to wail they children's death    And see another, as I see thee now,    Decked in they rights, as thou art stalled in mine.    Long die thy happy days before they death,    And, after many lengthened hours of grief,    Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen.    Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by,    And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son    Was stabbed with bloody daggers.   God I pray Him    That none of you may live his natural age,    But by some unlooked accident cut off.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,And only live by gazing.
What means Sicilia?
My lord,
If I did love you in my masters flame,    With such a suffering, such a deadly life,    In your denial I would find no sense;    I would not understand it.
You may indeed say so,For twas that hand that gave away my heart.
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.
What is the matter?
Ay; would they served us!
I shall not dine at home, I meet the captains at the citadel.
Ass, I doubt not.
No question.
Sir, my lord,    I could do this, and that with no rash potion,    But with a lingering dram that should not work    Maliciously like poison:   but I cannot    Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,    So sovereignly being honourable.    I have loved thee,
Cousin, theres fall'n between him and my lordAn unkind breach, but you shall make all well.
So.
Bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride,    For the embracements even of Jove himself;    At whose conception, till Lucina reign'd,    Nature this dowry gave, to glad her presence,    The senate-house of planets all did sit,    To knit in her their best perfections.
Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curseupon thee!
As well as we! ay, and better too; we offend worse.    Neither is our profession any trade; it's no    calling. But here comes Boult.
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
[rising]  Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.
O Doricles,Your praises are too large: but that your youth,And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,You woo'd me the false way.
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.
What is the news i' the court?
I know, Iago, Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love theeBut never more be officer of mine.
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
Now I fear thee not.    Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool    To give thee all and in his waning age    Set foot under thy table.   Tut, a toy!    An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
And so will I.
You need not fear it, sir:This child was prisoner to the womb and isBy law and process of great nature thenceFreed and enfranchised, not a party toThe anger of the king nor guilty of,If any be, the trespass of the queen.
Hence from Verona art thou banishèd.Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Now the condition.    The King of Naples, being an enemy    To me inveterate, hearkens my brothers suit,    Which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises    Of homage and I know not how much tribute,    Should presently extirpate me and mine    Out of the dukedom,   and confer fair Milan    With all the honors on my brother. Whereon,    A treacherous army levied,   one midnight    Fated to th' purpose did Antonio open    The gates of Milan, and, i' th' dead of darkness,    The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence    Me and thy crying self.
My husband?
I'll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.
Women will love her, that she is a womanMore worth than any man; men, that she isThe rarest of all women.
O, sir, a courtesy    Which if we should deny, the most just gods    For every graff would send a caterpillar,    And so afflict our province.   Yet once more    Let me entreat to know at large the cause    Of your king's sorrow.
God hold it, to your Honors good content!
Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the    porpus how he bounced and tumbled?   they say    they're half fish, half flesh: a plague on them,    they ne'er come but I look to be washed.   Master, I    marvel how the fishes live in the sea.
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Ay; prithee, sing.
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold    In him that did object the same to thee!    He was the wretchedst thing when he was young,    So long a-growing and so leisurely,    That if this rule were true, he should be gracious.
Didst thou not say he comes?
Of Mantua.
'Tis passing good. I prithee let me have it.
And therefore is he idle?
[To LODOVICO]  This is Othellos ancient, as I take it.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closetTo help me sort such needful ornamentsAs you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
Ha, ha!What things are these, my lord Antonio?Will money buy 'em?
Romeo.
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?  Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,  may I say.
(  aside  ) Well said, Master Parson.
Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the    little ones:   I can compare our rich misers to    nothing so fitly as to a whale;   a' plays and    tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at    last devours them all at a mouthful:   such whales    have I heard on o' the land, who never leave gaping    till they've swallowed the whole parish, church,    steeple, bells, and all.
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?My men should call me lord. I am your goodman.
Faith, as you say, theres small choice in rotten apples.   But come, since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained till by helping Baptistas eldest daughter to a husband    we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have tot afresh.   Sweet Bianca! Happy man be his dole! He thatruns fastest gets the ring. How say you, Signior Gremio?
Safely in harbor    Is the kings ship. In the deep nook where once    Thou calledst me up at midnight to fetch dew    From the still-vexed Bermoothes, there shes hid.    The mariners all under hatches stowed,    Who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor,    I have left asleep.   And for the rest o' th' fleet,    Which I dispersed, they all have met again    And are upon the Mediterranean float,    Bound sadly home for Naples,    Supposing that they saw the kings ship wracked    And his great person perish.
Here he is, here he is. How ist with you, sir? How ist with you, man?
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.
[aside]  Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
Give me thy hand,And let me see thee in thy womans weeds.
Ay, a thousand times Peter!
My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,    For which your honor and your faith is pawned    Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables    Which you promisèd I shall possess.
Sir Walter Herbert, a renownèd soldier;    Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,    Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,    And Rhys-ap-Thomas, with a valiant crew,    And many other of great name and worth;    And towards London they do bend their power,    If by the way they be not fought withal.
And soAm I to you.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth, And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
I know not, an't like you.
Strike!
Not a soul    But felt a fever of the mad and played    Some tricks of desperation.   All but mariners    Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,    Then all afire with me. The kings son, Ferdinand,    With hair up-staringthen, like reeds, not hair    Was the first man that leaped, cried, Hell is empty    And all the devils are here.
What I have been I have forgot to know;    But what I am, want teaches me to think on:    A man throng'd up with cold: my veins are chill,    And have no more of life than may suffice    To give my tongue that heat to ask your help;    Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,    For that I am a man, pray see me buried.
Oh, look, sir, look, sir! Here is more of us.    I prophesied if a gallows were on land,    This fellow could not drown.     [To BOATSWAIN]    Now, blasphemy,    That swearst grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore?    Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
I will chop her into messes! Cuckold me?
Ah, weraday! Hes dead, hes dead, hes dead!We are undone, lady, we are undone!Alack the day! Hes gone, hes killed, hes dead!
I must serve him so too, tell him of an intentthat's coming toward him.
Erroneous vassals, the great King of kings    Hath in the tables of His law commanded    That thou shalt do no murder.   Will thou then    Spurn at His edict and fulfill a mans?    Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand    To hurl upon their heads that break His law.
No, my most worthy master; in whose breast    Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late:    You should have fear'd false times when you did feast:    Suspect still comes where an estate is least.    That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,    Duty and zeal to your unmatched mind,    Care of your food and living;   and, believe it,    My most honour'd lord,    For any benefit that points to me,    Either in hope or present, I'ld exchange    For this one wish, that you had power and wealth    To requite me, by making rich yourself.
Your husband being troubled with a shrew Measures my husbands sorrow by his woe.And now you know my meaning.
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,How went he under him?
I do well believe your highness, and did it to ministeroccasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.
I' faith, hell have a lusty widow nowThat shall be wooed and wedded in a day.
Here comes the lord of Buckingham, and Derby.
Alack the day. Shes dead, shes dead, shes dead!
Tis well thou art not fish. If thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john.Draw thy tool! Here comes of the house of Montagues.
Yet let me obtain my wish.
Honest, ay, honest.
Were it better I should rush in thus    But where is Kate? Where is my love?    How does my father?   Gentles, methinks you frown.    And wherefore gaze this goodly company    As if they saw some wondrous monument,    Some comet or unusual prodigy?
Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so.
Nay, good lieutenant! I pray you, sir, hold your hand.  [stays him]
Sweet, so would I.    Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.    Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow    That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Here is more news.
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serveFor sweet discourses in our time to come.
I do not know    One of my sex, no womans face remember    Save, from my glass, mine own. Nor have I seen    More that I may call men than you, good friend,    And my dear father.   How features are abroad    I am skill-less of, but, by my modesty,    The jewel in my dower, I would not wish    Any companion in the world but you,    Nor can imagination form a shape    Besides yourself to like of. But I prattle    Something too wildly, and my fathers precepts    I therein do forget.
Kind gentlemen, lets go see poor Cassio dressed.    Come, mistress, you must tell s another tale.    Emilia, run you to the citadel    And tell my lord and lady what hath happed.    Will you go on afore?     (aside)     This is the night    That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
My father Capulet will have it so,And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
[aside]  This will I tell my master.
Nor I neither.
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some    care; so far that I have eyes under my service which    look upon his removedness;   from whom I have this    intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a    most homely shepherd;   a man, they say, that from    very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his    neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
Sir, 'tis the governor of Mytilene,Who, hearing of your melancholy state,Did come to see you.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,Son of Polixenes, with his princess, sheThe fairest I have yet beheld, desires accessTo your high presence.
Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.
Ratcliffe, come hither. Post to Salisbury.    When thou comst thither        [to CATESBY]    Dull, unmindful villain,    Why stayst thou here and gost not to the duke?
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.    Whats here? A cup, closed in my true loves hand?    Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.    O churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop    To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.    Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,    To make me die with a restorative.    [Kisses ROMEO]    Thy lips are warm.
Its true, good lieutenant.
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! Your eyes do menace me. Why look you pale?Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
To every article.    I boarded the kings ship. Now on the beak,    Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,    I flamed amazement.   Sometime Id divide,    And burn in many places. On the topmast,    The yards, and bowsprit would I flame distinctly,    Then meet and join.   Joves lightning, the precursors    O' th' dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary    And sight-outrunning were not.   The fire and cracks    Of sulfurous roaring the most mighty Neptune    Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,    Yea, his dread trident shake.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!
What should you fear?    'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into    For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.
Prithee, peace.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:Your servants servant is your servant, madam.
Do, good my lord. Your citizens entreat you.
Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear.Ye cannot reason almost with a man That looks not heavily and full of dread.
Ay, too gentle.
Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,    That you will wonder what hath fortuned.    Come, Proteus; 'tis your penance but to hear    The story of your loves discovered:    That done, our day of marriage shall be yours;    One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.
(sings) Shall I bid him go?
Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue    Should become kings of Naples?   O, rejoice    Beyond a common joy, and set it down    With gold on lasting pillars. In one voyage    Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis;    And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife    Where he himself was lost; Prospero, his dukedom    In a poor isle;   and all of us, ourselves    When no man was his own.
Oh, that the slave had forty thousand lives!    One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.    Now do I see tis true.   Look here, Iago,    All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven'tis gone.    Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell!    Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne    To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,    For tis of aspics' tongues!
To be a make-peace shall become my age:Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
These eyes could never endure that beautys wrack.    You should not blemish it, if I stood by.    As all the world is cheerèd by the sun,    So I by that. It is my day, my life.
Hie to your chamber. Ill find Romeo    To comfort you. I wot well where he is.    Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.    Ill to him. He is hid at Lawrence cell.
By this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster.When s gods asleep, hell rob his bottle.
[to MIRANDA]  Awake, dear heart, awake! Thou hast slept well.Awake!
Empress I am, but yonder sits the emperor.
My lord, I hold my life as dear as you do yours,    And never in my days, I do protest,    Was it so precious to me as tis now.    Think you but that I know our state secure,    I would be so triumphant as I am?
I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee. My mistress showed me thee and thy dog and thy bush.
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.
Ay, and hell tame her.
How well my comfort is revived by this!
Never, my lord.
A piece of painting, which I do beseechYour lordship to accept.
Then you love us, we you, and we'll clasp hands:When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack.If it prove lawful prize, hes made for ever.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.Good signior, you shall more command with yearsThan with your weapons.
[t    o  SIR TOBY BELCH   ]  Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! Did not I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a care of him.
Before me! Look, where she comes.
Where is the Master, Boatswain?
She is indeed perfection.
Why dost thou stay?
What men of name resort to him?
Look, and thou shalt see.
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
[to ARIEL]  Thou shalt be freeAs mountain winds. But then exactly doAll points of my command.
Yet you are withered.
Too like the sire for ever being good.    First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl;    A sight to vex the father's soul withal.    Get me a ladder.
My lord.
Asses.
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
So, so, there!    Aches contract and starve your supple joints!    That there should be small love 'mongst these    sweet knaves,    And all this courtesy!   The strain of man's bred out    Into baboon and monkey.
Knowst thou not any whom corrupting goldWill tempt unto a close exploit of death?
With Rosaline, my ghostly Father? No.I have forgot that name and that names woe.
I am glad you're well.
I'll swear for 'em.
[aside]  Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings.    The sun for sorrow will not show his head.    Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;    Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd;    For never was a story of more woe    Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
He's opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in,And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoesThe very heart of kindness.
A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.    'Tis a spirit: sometime't appears like a lord;    sometime like a lawyer;   sometime like a philosopher,    with two stones moe than's artificial one: he is    very often like a knight; and, generally, in all    shapes that man goes up and down in from fourscore    to thirteen, this spirit walks in.
Anything.
[Aside]  Excellent workman! thou canst not paint aman so bad as is thyself.
Welcome, AEmilius what's the news from Rome?
Nay, good Sir Toby.
To be Count Malvolio!
Sir!
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:    we cannot with such magnificencein so rareI know not what to say.     We will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse us.
But as tis,    We cannot miss him.   He does make our fire,    Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices    That profit us.   What, ho! Slave! Caliban!    Thou earth, thou! Speak.
Save you, worthy general!
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve    That do conspire my death with devilish plots    Of damnèd witchcraft,   and that have prevailed    Upon my body with their hellish charms?
Irreparable is the loss, and patienceSays it is past her cure.
No shame but mine. I must, forsooth, be forced    To give my hand, opposed against my heart,    Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen,    Who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure.    I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,    Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior,    And, to be noted for a merry man,    Hell woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,    Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns,    Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed.    Now must the world point at poor Katherine    And say, Lo, there is mad Petruchios wife,    If it would please him come and marry her!
My lord, I take my leave.  [going]
Alas, my lord,-
And must we be divided? must we part?
Call them forth.
What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?
Trust me, I fear it has.    I hope you will consider what is spoke    Comes from my love. But I do see youre moved.    I am to pray you not to strain my speech    To grosser issues nor to larger reach    Than to suspicion.
[aside to  HORTENSIO  ]    Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.    Much good do it unto thy gentle heart.    Kate, eat apace. And now, my honey love,    Will we return unto thy fathers house    And revel it as bravely as the best,    With silken coats and caps and golden rings,    With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things,    With scarves and fans and double change of brav'ry,    With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.    What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure    To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Most sweet lady
Thy yellow stockings?
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning.    Theres some conceit or other likes him well    When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.    I think theres never a man in Christendom    Can lesser hide his love or hate than he,    For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
Ay, my lord.
Why, then she is the devil's dam; a joyful issue.
How now, gentleman? How is t with you?
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house   ;    For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated:    Tell her I send to her my kind commends;    Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.
Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebused your Worship?
Good morrow to your lordship.
Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and her will is it should be so returned.   [he throws down the ring]    If it be worth stooping for, there it lies in your eye. If not, be it his that finds it.
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancyMay think anon it moves.
If the king had no son, they would desire to liveon crutches till he had one.
My father hath a power; inquire of himAnd learn to make a body of a limb.
I am glad to see you mad.
Whats the matter?
You would not hear me,At many leisures I proposed.
A husband? A devil!
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes    That have been so bedazzled with the sun    That everything I look on seemeth green.    Now I perceive thou art a reverend father.    Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
But that you do not love me.I pray you bring me on the way a littleAnd say if I shall see you soon at night.
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child    And here was left by th' sailors. Thou, my slave,    As thou reportst thyself, wast then her servant.    And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate    To act her earthy and abhorred commands,    Refusing her grand hests,   she did confine thee,    By help of her more potent ministers    And in her most unmitigable rage,    Into a cloven pine,   within which rift    Imprisoned thou didst painfully remain    A dozen years; within which space she died    And left thee there,   where thou didst vent thy groans    As fast as mill wheels strike. Then was this island    Save for the son that she did litter here,    A freckled whelp hag-bornnot honored with    A human shape.
The great contention of the sea and skiesParted our fellowship
Excellently done, if God did all.
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.     (to OTHELLO)     O murderous coxcomb! What should such a fool    Do with so good a wife?
Knows he of this?
Good Sir Toby!
Thy husband.
What you do    Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.    I'ld have you do it ever:   when you sing,    I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,    Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,    To sing them too:   when you do dance, I wish you    A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do    Nothing but that; move still, still so,    And own no other function:   each your doing,    So singular in each particular,    Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,    That all your acts are queens.
God shield I should disturb devotion!Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.  [Kisses her]  Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you;Ay, so well, that you must be her master,And she will be your scholar: therefore look to it.
Pardon, madam:    The one I have almost forgot,your pardon,    The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,    Will have your tongue too.   This is a creature,    Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal    Of all professors else, make proselytes    Of who she but bid follow.
What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
I hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.
How canst thou urge Gods dreadful law to usWhen thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
'Tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.
Ill follow this good man, and go with you;And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.
O Cassio, whence came this?    This is some token from a newer friend!    To the felt absence now I feel a cause.    Is t come to this? Well, well.
Go ask his name.
But, soft! here come my executioners.How now, my hardy, stout, resolvèd mates?Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselvesDo strike at my injustice.  [HERMIONE swoons]  How now there!
Here.Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste,For comfort is too far for us to expect.
My noble father,    I do perceive here a divided duty.    To you I am bound for life and education.    My life and education both do learn me    How to respect you. You are the lord of duty.    I am hitherto your daughter.   But heres my husband.    And so much duty as my mother showed    To you, preferring you before her father,    So much I challenge that I may profess    Due to the Moor my lord.
Lord Timon, hear me speak.
[Giving PETER her fan]  Before, and apace.
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping.    My dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one    My daughter might have been:   my queen's square brows;    Her stature to an inch; as wand-like straight;    As silver-voiced; her eyes as jewel-like    And cased as richly; in pace another Juno;    Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them hungry,    The more she gives them speech. Where do you live?
Full half an hour.
This news is mortal to the queen: look downAnd see what death is doing.
Too old by heaven. Let still the woman take    An elder than herself.   So wears she to him,    So sways she level in her husbands heart.    For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,    Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,    More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,    Than womens are.
Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Nor you, as we are, loyal.
We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.
Ventidius lately    Buried his father; by whose death he's stepp'd    Into a great estate:   when he was poor,    Imprison'd and in scarcity of friends,    I clear'd him with five talents:   greet him from me;    Bid him suppose some good necessity    Touches his friend, which craves to be remember'd    With those five talents.
I thank thee for that jest. Heres a garment for t. Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this country. Steal by line and level is an excellent pass of pate. Theres another garment for t.
Wrench his sword from him.
I never did her any, to my knowledge.
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
I do not, sir.
Here is the cap your Worship did bespeak.
[To OLIVIA]   Be not amazed. Right noble is his blood.    If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,    I shall have share in this most happy wreck.    [To VIOLA]   Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times    Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal?
We know each others faces; for our hearts,    He knows no more of mine than I of yours,    Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.    Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
Ill have this crown of mine cut from my shouldersBefore Ill see the crown so foul misplaced.But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
I told him that your father was at Venice,And that you looked for him this day in Padua.
Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,    My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow    More than my brother:   Ay, quoth my uncle Gloucester,    Small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace.    And since, methinks I would not grow so fast    Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!    Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.    'Tis in my head to do my master good.    I see no reason but supposed Lucentio    Must get a father, called supposed Vincentio    And thats a wonder.   Fathers commonly    Do get their children. But in this case of wooing,    A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
O miserable, unhappy that I am!
[to SEBASTIAN]  Ha, ha, ha!
Ariel, thy chargeExactly is performed. But theres more work.What is the time o' th' day?
Orsino, noble sir,    Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me.    Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,    Though, I confess, on base and ground enough,    Orsinos enemy.   A witchcraft drew me hither.    That most ingrateful boy there by your side    From the rude seas enraged and foamy mouth    Did I redeem.   A wreck past hope he was.    His life I gave him and did thereto add    My love, without retention or restraint,    All his in dedication.   For his sake    Did I expose myself, pure for his love,    Into the danger of this adverse town,    Drew to defend him when he was beset,    Where being apprehended, his false cunning,    (Not meaning to partake with me in danger)    Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,    And grew a twenty-years-removed thing    While one would wink, denied me mine own purse,    Which I had recommended to his use    Not half an hour before.
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.
God be with you, sir; I will.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?    Doth she not think me an old murderer,    Now I have stained the childhood of our joy    With blood removed but little from her own?    Where is she? And how doth she? And what says    My concealed lady to our canceled love?
She hath been fairer, madam, than she is:    When she did think my master loved her well,    She, in my judgment, was as fair as you:    But since she did neglect her looking-glass    And threw her sun-expelling mask away,    The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks    And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face,    That now she is become as black as I.
Upon my knee, what doth your speech import?I understand a fury in your words,But not the words.
It shall not live.
He went hence but now,And certainly in strange unquietness.
Ha, ha!Publius, Publius, what hast thou done?See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant.    Methinks he looks as though he were in love.    Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble    To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale,    Seize thee that list!   If once I find thee ranging,    Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
That handkerchiefWhich I so loved and gave thee, thou gavstTo Cassio.
It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, heres my purse.    [giving him money]    In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,    Is best to lodge.   I will bespeak our diet,    Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge    With viewing of the town. There shall you have me.
I have already.
My cake is dough, but Ill in among the rest,Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.
Whos there?
Follow me, then. Lord Helicane, a word.
A herald, Kate? Oh, put me in thy books!
Nor go neither. But youll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither.
What noise?
A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it. Where lies your text?
Thou wast provokèd by thy bloody mind, That never dreamst on aught but butcheries.Didst thou not kill this king?
None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing,Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
Well, I say no. And therefore, for assurance,    Lets each one send unto his wife;    And he whose wife is most obedient    To come at first when he doth send for her,    Shall win the wager which we will propose.
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common    hangman shall execute it.   Come your ways. We'll    have no more gentlemen driven away. Come your ways, I say.
By his great authority;Which often hath no less prevail'd than soOn your command.
When I was born:    Never was waves nor wind more violent;    And from the ladder-tackle washes off    A canvas-climber.   'Ha!' says one, 'wilt out?'    And with a dropping industry they skip    From stem to stern:   the boatswain whistles, and    The master calls, and trebles their confusion.
I swear
If this proveA vision of the Island, one dear sonShall I twice lose.
Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead.
Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
Away, inhuman dog! unhallow'd slave!Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in.
Sorry I am my noble cousin should    Suspect me that I mean no good to him.    By heaven, we come to him in perfect love,    And so once more return and tell his grace.
A pretty moral;From the dejected state wherein he is,He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.
[tracing a circle on the ground]     Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves,    And ye that on the sands with printless foot    Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him    When he comes back;   you demi-puppets that    By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,    Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime    Is to make midnight mushrooms,   that rejoice    To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid,    Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimmed    The noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds,    And twixt the green sea and the azured vault    Set roaring warto th' dread rattling thunder    Have I given fire, and rifted Joves stout oak    With his own bolt;   the strong-based promontory    Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up    The pine and cedar; graves at my command    Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth    By my so potent art.   But this rough magic    I here abjure, and when I have required    Some heavenly music, which even now I do,    To work mine end upon their senses that    This airy charm is for,   Ill break my staff,    Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,    And deeper than did ever plummet sound    Ill drown my book.
A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.
Ill have no halves. Ill bear it all myself.
Very noblyHave you deserved: it is my father's musicTo speak your deeds, not little of his careTo have them recompensed as thought on.
Women nearest; but men, men are the thingsthemselves. What wouldst thou do with the world,Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?
What tongueless blocks were they! Would not they speak?Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging    About his neck, Bohemia:   who, if I    Had servants true about me, that bare eyes    To see alike mine honour as their profits,    Their own particular thrifts, they would do that    Which should undo more doing:   ay, and thou,    His cupbearer,whom I from meaner form    Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see    Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,    How I am galled,   mightst bespice a cup,    To give mine enemy a lasting wink;    Which draught to me were cordial.
Had I a steward    So true, so just, and now so comfortable?    It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.    Let me behold thy face. Surely, this man    Was born of woman.    Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,    You perpetual-sober gods! I do proclaim    One honest manmistake me notbut one;    No more, I pray,and he's a steward.    How fain would I have hated all mankind!    And thou redeem'st thyself: but all, save thee,    I fell with curses.    Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;    For, by oppressing and betraying me,    Thou mightst have sooner got another service:    For many so arrive at second masters,    Upon their first lord's neck.   But tell me true    For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure    Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,    If not a usuring kindness, and, as rich men deal gifts,    Expecting in return twenty for one?
What say you, master?
Send out a pursuivant-at-arms    To Stanleys regiment.   Bid him bring his power    Before sunrising, lest his son George fall    Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Meaning to curtsy?
Three talents on the present; in future, all.
She's a gallant lady.
Away towards Salisbury! While we reason here,    A royal battle might be won and lost.    Someone take order Buckingham be brought    To Salisbury. The rest march on with me.
Sir, even nowDid the sea toss upon our shore this chest:'Tis of some wreck.
Do it not with poison. Strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated.
Lay't so to his charge:He's with the king your father.
Thats all one: has hurt me, and theres the end on t.  [To FOOL]  Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?
[To VIOLA]   Come, away!
Why, York, what wilt thou do?    Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?    Have we more sons? or are we like to have?    Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?    And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,    And rob me of a happy mother's name?    Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the conditionof that fardel, the place of your dwelling, yournames, your ages, of what having, breeding, and anything that is fitting to be known, discover.
And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You shall hear more by midnight.
What means our cousin, that he stares and looksSo wildly?
Why, man, hes a very devil. I have not seen such a firago.   I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all, and he gives me the stuck-in with such a mortal motion, that it is inevitable.   And on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they stepon.   They say he has been fencer to the Sophy.
What kind of woman ist?
None, but toMaintain my opinion.
Draw together.And when I rear my hand, do you the like,To fall it on Gonzalo.
Come away.
I have another weapon in this chamber,    It was a sword of Spain, the ice-brooks temper.    Oh, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.
I willingly obey your command.
What, art thou ashamed of me?
All ready. And therefore, I pray thee, news.
Presently?
And, uncle, so will I, an if I live.
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,    And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir:    Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,    And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,    Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.
How many women saw this child of his?
Marry, I will. Let them play it. Is not a comonty aChristmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
In loveWho respects friend?
O, take her home, mistress, take her home: theseblushes of hers must be quenched with some present practise.
I'll ha' thee burnt.
And tis great pity that the noble Moor    Should hazard such a place as his own second    With one of an ingraft infirmity.    It were an honest action to say    So to the Moor.
'Tis pitiful, but yet Iago knows    That she with Cassio hath the act of shame    A thousand times committed.   Cassio confessed it,    And she did gratify his amorous works    With that recognizance and pledge of love    Which I first gave her.   I saw it in his hand,    It was a handkerchief, an antique token    My father gave my mother.
Nay, come, sit down; then on.
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.    The king, on his own royal disposition,    And not provoked by any suitor else,    Aiming belike at your interior hatred    That in your outward actions shows itself    Against my children, brothers, and myself,    Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground    Of your ill will, and thereby to remove it.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a manAs all the world. Why, hes a man of wax.
Good Lord, how like the empress' sons they are!    And you, the empress! but we worldly men    Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.    O sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee;    And, if one arm's embracement will content thee,    I will embrace thee in it by and by.
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.    Tomorrow, in my judgement, is too sudden,    For I myself am not so well provided    As else I would be, were the day prolonged.
Why?
I would therefore my sister had no name, sir.
Shell none o' the count.   Shell not match above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit. I have heard her swear t   . Tut, theres life in t, man.
I blush to think upon this ignomy.
What then?
Sit, sir, sit.
He took good rest to-night;'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.
The woman falls! Sure he hath killed his wife.
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely. Comes there any more of it?
I have a pain upon my forehead, here.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.    Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil    Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
O, in the duke of Gloucesters purse.
Excellent.
Nay, let him alone. Ill go another way to work with him.   Ill have an action of battery against him if therebe any law in Illyria.   Though I struck him first, yet its no matter for that.
No, marry. I fear thee.
What news abroad?
O, ho, entreat her!Nay, then she must needs come.
'I go, sir!'Take the bonds along with you,And have the dates in contempt.
Throw thy glove,    Or any token of thine honour else,    That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress    And not as our confusion,   all thy powers    Shall make their harbour in our town, till we    Have seal'd thy full desire.
Gramercies, good fool: how does your mistress?
To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runnst away.
Who sets me else?   by heaven, I'll throw at all:    I have a thousand spirits in one breast,    To answer twenty thousand such as you.
I' fecks!    Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast    smutch'd thy nose?    They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,    We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:    And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf    Are all call'd neat.   Still virginalling    Upon his palm!   How now, you wanton calf!    Art thou my calf?
Marry, I will, and this is wisely done.
But can you teach all this you speak of?
Do not then walk too open.
I shall be much bound to you for t. I am one that hadrather go with sir priest than sir knight. I care not who knows so much of my mettle.
Not so; I think she lives.
[to ALONSO]    Behold, sir King,    The wrongèd Duke of Milan, Prospero.    For more assurance that a living prince    Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body.    And to thee and thy company I bid    A hearty welcome.    [embraces ALONSO]
Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee,For knowing thee to be but young and light
I will stand to and feed,    Although my last.   No matter,   since I feel    The best is past. Brother, my lord the duke,    Stand to and do as we.
With her, on her, what you will.
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.
I hate thee worse.
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you, For I attend here. But Ill see you soon.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,The men you talk of came into my mind.What, go you toward the Tower?
Is he well shipped?
If thou didst know me, thou wouldest talk with me.
I think his soul is in hell, madonna.
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonightI do entreat that we may sup together. You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys!
No. So God help me, they spake not a word    But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,    Stared each on other and looked deadly pale;    Which when I saw, I reprehended them    And asked the mayor what meant this willful silence.    His answer was, the people were not used    To be spoke to but by the recorder.    Then he was urged to tell my tale again:    Thus saith the duke. Thus hath the duke inferred    But nothing spoke in warrant from himself.    When he had done, some followers of mine own,    At the lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps,    And some ten voices cried God save King Richard!    And thus I took the vantage of those few.    Thanks, gentle citizens and friends, quoth I.    "This general applause and cheerful shout    Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard"    And even here brake off, and came away.
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,If thou but thinkst him wronged and makst his earA stranger to thy thoughts.
Welcome, ass. Now lets have a catch.
The time to come.
Remember our reward when the deeds done.
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily wound. There is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without deserving.   You have lost no reputation at all unless yourepute yourself such a loser. What, man, there are waysto recover the general again.   You are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion. Sue to him again and hes yours.
Good my lord,
'Tis certain then for Cyprus.Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
Ay, my good lord: five talents is his debt,    His means most short, his creditors most strait:    Your honourable letter he desires    To those have shut him up; which failing,    Periods his comfort.
If you had sent but two hours before,
Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.
Well mock'd.
Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,    To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then,    If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster    More than their own! What then? How then?    What shall I say? Wheres satisfaction?    It is impossible you should see this,    Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,    As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross    As ignorance made drunk.   But yet, I say,    If imputation and strong circumstances    Which lead directly to the door of truth    Will give you satisfaction, you may have t.
Whats the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put tricks upon s with savages and men of Ind, ha? I have not scaped drowning to be afeard now of your four legs.   Or it hath been said, As proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground, and it shall be said so again while Stephano breathes at' nostrils.
Lend me a garter. So.Oh, for a chair,To bear him easily hence!
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,    With all the rest of that consorted crew,    Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.    Good uncle, help to order several powers    To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:    They shall not live within this world, I swear,    But I will have them, if I once know where.    Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:    Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.
I thank them; and would send them back the plague,Could I but catch it for them.
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
I would we had a thousand Roman damesAt such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.
[aside]  So wise so young, they say, do never live long.
That dignifies the renown of a bawd, no less than itgives a good report to a number to be chaste.
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,    My very noble and approved good masters,    That I have ta'en away this old mans daughter,    It is most true. True, I have married her.    The very head and front of my offending    Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,    And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace,    For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith    Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used    Their dearest action in the tented field,    And little of this great world can I speak,    More than pertains to feats of broils and battle,    And therefore little shall I grace my cause    In speaking for myself.   Yet, by your gracious patience,    I will a round unvarnished tale deliver    Of my whole course of love.   What drugs, what charms,    What conjuration and what mighty magic    For such proceeding I am charged withal    I won his daughter.
[to GONZALO]  First, noble friend,Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannotBe measured or confined.
Well show thee Io as she was a maidAnd how she was beguileèd and surprised,As lively painted as the deed was done.
Traitor!
I am no strumpet, but of life as honestAs you that thus abuse me.
Where have  I  been? Nay, how now, where are you? Master,has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or you stolenhis? Or both? Pray, whats the news?
Be it as you shall privately determine, Either for her stay or going. Th' affair cries hasteAnd speed must answer it.
I cannot tell. I fear tis choleric. What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
Sir Topas!
Bless me from marrying a usurer!
Tis more, tis more. His son is elder, sir.His son is thirty.
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.
Ay, husband. Can he that deny?
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
And give me leave,And do not say 'tis superstition, thatI kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady,Dear queen, that ended when I but began,Give me that hand of yours to kiss.
You shall prevail,Were it to woo my daughter; for it seemsYou have been noble towards her.
Where I am but a stranger: from the deckYou may discern the place.
To save her life, Ill say she is not so.
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
Faith, here it is.    Romeo is banishèd, and all the world to nothing    That he dares neer come back to challenge you.    Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.    Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,    I think it best you married with the county.    Oh, hes a lovely gentleman.    Romeos a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,    Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye    As Paris hath.   Beshrew my very heart,    I think you are happy in this second match,    For it excels your first. Or if it did not,    Your first is dead, or twere as good he were,    As living here and you no use of him.
O knight, thou lackest a cup of canary. When did I see thee so put down?
Oh, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,    And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,    And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,    And then down falls again.
Why, our battalia trebles that account.    Besides, the kings name is a tower of strength    Which they upon the adverse party want.    Up with the tent!Come, noble gentlemen,    Let us survey the vantage of the ground.    Call for some men of sound direction.    Lets lack no discipline, make no delay,    For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
Catesby, o'erlook the walls.
Now he importunes himTo tell it o'er. Go to, well said, well said.
Stay, officer. He shall not go to prison.
Villain, I say, knock me at this gateAnd rap me well, or Ill knock your knaves pate.
The man is honest.
A very mean meaning.
If that the Turkish fleetBe not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.It is impossible they bear it out.
Of love?
Well, sir, we will not.
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if I be a dog?
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
I cannot too much muse    Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, expressing,    Although they want the use of tongue, a kind    Of excellent dumb discourse.
Oh, heaven forgive us!
For me,    That am a maid, though most ungentle fortune    Have placed me in this sty, where, since I came,    Diseases have been sold dearer than physic,    O, that the gods    Would set me free from this unhallow'd place,    Though they did change me to the meanest bird    That flies i' the purer air!
Ay, and much more; but I was born so high.Our aerie buildeth in the cedars top,And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
Thy reason, man?
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen,And, princely peers, a happy time of day.
Fellow Grumio!
This found I on my tent this morning.
Romeo, my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
More man? plague, plague!
[to ALONSO]  Sir
O God!O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?    My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.    How shall that faith return again to earth,    Unless that husband send it me from heaven    By leaving earth?   Comfort me. Counsel me.    Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems    Upon so soft a subject as myself.    What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?    Some comfort, Nurse.
This is all:Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;Do't not, thou split'st thine own.
My hand to thee; mine honour on my promise.
No, sir, no jot. I know your favor well,Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.Take him away. He knows I know him well.
Sings     It was the friar of orders gray,      As he forth walkèd on his way    :    A servant tries to take off  PETRUCHIO  s boots.    Out, you rogue! You pluck my foot awry.    Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.    Strikes the servant    Be merry, Kate.Some water, here, what, ho!    Wheres my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence    And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither.
Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon: I come toobserve; I give thee warning on't.
By my troth, sir, nothough it please you to be one of my friends.
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
Why, fare thee well:Here is some gold for thee.
I took him to be killed with a thunderstroke. But art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the deadmooncalfs gaberdine for fear of the storm.   And art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans scaped!    [dances STEPHANO about]
Prithee, say on.    The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim    A matter from thee,   and a birth indeed    Which throes thee much to yield.
Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio  Petruchio.Rise, Grumio, rise. We will compound this quarrel.
Ay, to me.    She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted    By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks.    For nature so prepost'rously to err,    Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,    Sans witchcraft could not.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
I thank you; you shall hear from me anon:Go not away. What have you there, my friend?
Stay your thanks a while;And pay them when you part.
A mighty man of Pisa. By report    I know him well. You are very welcome, sir.    [To  HORTENSIO  as  LITIO  ]   Take you the lute,    [To  LUCENTIO  as  CAMBIO  ]   and you the set of books.    You shall go see your pupils presently.    Holla, within!
I also wish it to you. I think this honourable lorddid but try us this other day.
More whore, more mischief first; I have given you earnest.
If you require a little space for prayer,    I grant it: pray; but be not tedious,    For the gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn    To do my work with haste.
I know none such, my lord.
[as VINCENTIO]  Lay hands on the villain. I believe he means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.
Do, and be witness to 't.
Why, thats all one.
Good heart, at what?
My lord,If I can get him within my pistol's length,I'll make him sure enough: so, farewell to your highness.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,    One of our order, to associate me,    Here in this city visiting the sick,    And finding him, the searchers of the town,    Suspecting that we both were in a house    ere the infectious pestilence did reign,    Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth.    So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
O, sir, things must be as they may; and what a mancannot get, he may lawfully deal forhis wife's soul.
What kind o' man is he?
Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.
Doth my lord call?
Come, your hand;And, daughter, yours.
Madam, I will.
But so is not she.
I do think so. Pray you, turn your eyes upon me.You are like something thatWhat country-woman?Here of these shores?
My life, sir! how, I pray? For that goes hard.
[as LUCENTIO]  Why, shes a devil, a devil, the devils dam.
It does: but time willand so
Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poorbastards,as, I think, I have brought up some eleven
Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, I am loath to prove reason with them.
Indifferent.
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,    Makes the night morning, and the noontide night.    Princes have but their titles for their glories,    An outward honor for an inward toil,    And, for unfelt imaginations,    They often feel a world of restless cares,    So that betwixt their titles and low name    There's nothing differs but the outward fame.
He's been told so, and he says hell stand at your door like a sheriffs post, and be the supporter to a bench, but hell speak with you.
Hail, sir! my lord, lend ear.
I follow you.
(  aside  ) Marry, hang thee, brock!
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.
What if I do obey?    How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,    Whose messengers are here about my side    Upon some present business of the state    To bring me to him?
Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,William Lord Hastings had pronounced your partI mean your voice for crowning of the king.
Which way is he, in the name of sanctity?   If all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possessed him, yet Ill speak to him.
Come, come. Have with you. Wot you what, my lord?Today the lords you talked of are beheaded.
He that has the two fair daughtersis t he you mean?
Whither, my lord?Cesario, husband, stay.
O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
Cornelia the midwife and myself;And no one else but the deliver'd empress.
I hope so.
He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,    To visit him tomorrow or next day.    He is within, with two right reverend fathers,    Divinely bent to meditation,    And in no worldly suits would he be moved    To draw him from his holy exercise.
No, I'll nothing: for if I should be bribed too,    there would be none left to rail upon thee, and then    thou wouldst sin the faster.   Thou givest so long,    Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in    paper shortly: what need these feasts, pomps and    vain-glories?
Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir!    You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms!    What, no attendance? No regard? No duty?    Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
I told him what I thought, and told no moreThan what he found himself was apt and true.
He is a kinsman to the Montague.    Affection makes him false. He speaks not true.    Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,    And all those twenty could but kill one life.    I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.    Romeo slew Tybalt. Romeo must not live.
I think she doth; and that's her cause of sorrow.
Prince Pericles,
Queen Mab, whats she?
My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that color.
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myselfAgainst their will. But who comes here?
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
Call me to your remembrances.
Good, and valiant.
Will you hear t again?
Thou art a villain!
The boy gives warning something doth approach.What cursèd foot wanders this way tonightTo cross my obsequies and true loves rite?
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Here, my lord.
Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast    Rideth a puissant navy. To our shores    Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,    Unarmed and unresolved to beat them back.    'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;    And there they hull, expecting but the aid    Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
Ill tell thee ere thou ask it me again.    I have been feasting with mine enemy,    Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,    Thats by me wounded.   Both our remedies    Within thy help and holy physic lies.    I bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo,    My intercession likewise steads my foe.
News, lads, Our wars are done!    The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks,    That their designment halts.   A noble ship of Venice    Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance    On most part of their fleet.
[To HORTENSIO]   Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatlywhat his mind is.   Why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses.   Why, nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.
I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt    spiritgive thee thy dueand one that knows what    belongs to reason;   and canst use the time well, if    the time use thee well: good parts in thee.
That you do think you are not what you are.
Soft, sir! One word more.     [   aside]     They are both in eithers powers, but this swift business    I must uneasy make lest too light winning    Make the prize light.     [To FERDINAND]     One word more. I charge thee    That thou attend me.   Thou dost here usurp    The name thou owest not, and hast put thyself    Upon this island as a spy to win it    From me, the lord on t.
The time hath been,    Would you have been so brief with him,   he would    Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,    For taking so the head, your whole head's length  .
Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?
Peace, Grumio. It is the rival of my love.Petruchio, stand by a while.
Never trust me, then. And by all means stir on the youth to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together.   For Andrew, if he were opened and you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, Ill eat the rest of the anatomy.
'Tis burnt, and so is all the meat.    What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?    How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser    And serve it thus to me that love it not?    There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all!    Throws the meat, & c. about the stage    You heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves!    What, do you grumble? Ill be with you straight.
No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
Thats strange.
Kind sister, thanks. Well enter all together.
O how that name befits my composition!    Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:    Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;    And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?    For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;    Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:    The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,    Is my strict fast; I mean, my children's looks;    And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:    Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,    Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.
In Orsinos bosom.
And you, sir.
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found itAnd I did give t my husband.
One Sir Andrew
What manner of man?
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.     [they move aside]     Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business    And finds the testy gentleman so hot    As he will lose his head ere give consent    His masters child, as worshipfully he terms it,    Shall lose the royalty of Englands throne.
Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus    Intend my travel, where I'll hear from thee;    And by whose letters I'll dispose myself.    The care I had and have of subjects' good    On thee I lay whose wisdom's strength can bear it.    I'll take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath:    Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both:    But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe,    That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince,    Thou show'dst a subject's shine, I a true prince.
How could that be?    Either thou art most ignorant by age,    Or thou wert born a fool.   Camillo's flight,    Added to their familiarity,    Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,    That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation    But only seeing, all other circumstances    Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:    Yet, for a greater confirmation,    For in an act of this importance 'twere    Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post    To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,    Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know    Of stuff'd sufficiency:   now from the oracle    They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,    Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?
Madam, this service I have done for you,    Though you respect not aught your servant doth,    To hazard life and rescue you from him    That would have forced your honour and your love;    Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look;    A smaller boon than this I cannot beg    And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.
I prithee, do so.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic sea,    Whose icy current and compulsive course    Ne'er keeps retiring ebb but keeps due on    To the Propontic and the Hellespont,    Even so my bloody thoughts with violent pace    Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love    Till that a capable and wide revenge    Swallow them up.   Now, by yon marble heaven,    In the due reverence of a sacred vow    I here engage my words.    (he kneels)
Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,He makes for England, here to claim the crown.
AEmilius, let the emperor give his pledgesUnto my father and my uncle Marcus,And we will come. March away.
How much money must I have?
What tellst thou me of robbing? This is Venice,My house is not a grange.
Draw, if you be men.Gregory, remember thy washing blow.
Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts.    Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,    Expedient manage must be made, my liege,    Ere further leisure yield them further means    For their advantage and your highness' loss.
Ha? Let me see her. Out, alas! Shes cold.    Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.    Life and these lips have long been separated.    Death lies on her like an untimely frost    Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
'Tis new to thee.
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
Why then methinks tis time to smile again.    O world, how apt the poor are to be proud!    If one should be a prey, how much the better    To fall before the lion than the wolf!
I did but crave.
We'll part the time between's then; and in thatI'll no gainsaying.
O Hermione,    As every present time doth boast itself    Above a better gone, so must thy grave    Give way to what's seen now!   Sir, you yourself    Have said and writ so, but your writing now    Is colder than that theme, 'She had not been,    Nor was not to be equall'd;'thus your verse    Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,    To say you have seen a better.
[Within]   Open the door, secure, foolhardy king:    Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?    Open the door, or I will break it open.
My brothers love, the devil, and my rage.
God-a-mercy, Grumio! Then he shall have no odds.
God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so, and kiss thyhand so oft?
Hast stolen it from her?
Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thougivest me,Not all thy counsel.
What dost thou think?
And in good time,Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the duke.
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!Pray you, a word.
It was, Andronicus.
Peace, children, peace. The king doth love you well.Incapable and shallow innocents,You cannot guess who caused your fathers death.
Come, let us go; and pray to all the godsFor our beloved mother in her pains.
Honor, riches, marriage, blessing,    Long continuance, and increasing,    Hourly joys be still upon you.    Juno sings her blessings on you.
We are not thieves, but men that much do want.
Ay, and this.
Ye're honest men: ye've heard that I have gold;I am sure you have: speak truth; ye're honest men.
Unless I have mista'en his colors much,    Which well I am assured I have not done,    His regiment lies half a mile, at least,    South from the mighty power of the king.
Traffic's thy god; and thy god confound thee!
He'll stay my lord.
Most noble sir,    That which I shall report will bear no credit,    Were not the proof so nigh.   Please you, great sir,    Bohemia greets you from himself by me;    Desires you to attach his son,   who has    His dignity and duty both cast off    Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with    A shepherd's daughter.
If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:every lane's end, every shop, church, session,hanging, yields a careful man work.
If partially affined or leagued in officeThou dost deliver more or less than truthThou art no soldier.
That deaths unnatural that kills for loving.    Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?    Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.    These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope    They do not point on me.
Wrong not her birth. She is a royal princess.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
I am not weary, and tis long to night:    I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes    With the memorials and the things of fame    That do renown this city.
He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he haspaid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
An it had not fallen flat-long.
Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of MilanAnd his brave son being twain.
On pain of death, no person be so bold    Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,    Except the marshal and such officers    Appointed to direct these fair designs.
A maiden never bold,    Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion    Blushed at herself. And she, in spite of nature,    Of years, of country, credit, everything,    To fall in love with what she feared to look on?    It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect    That will confess perfection so could err.    Against all rules of nature,   and must be driven    To find out practices of cunning hell    Why this should be.   I therefore vouch again    That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood    Or with some dram, conjured to this effect,    He wrought upon her.
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue    Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.    In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted,    I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length,    That reacheth from the restful English court    As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'    Amongst much other talk, that very time,    I heard you say that you had rather refuse    The offer of an hundred thousand crowns    Than Bolingbroke's return to England;    Adding withal how blest this land would be    In this your cousin's death.
There is a sicknessWhich puts some of us in distemper, butI cannot name the disease; and it is caughtOf you that yet are well.
Sir, you are music's master.
Nay, this was but his dream.
Of sorrow or of joy?
[reads]  With a trunk sleeve
And, madam,I must be present at your conference.
As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;    But as I come, I come for Lancaster.    And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace    Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:    You are my father, for methinks in you    I see old Gaunt alive;   O, then, my father,    Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd    A wandering vagabond;     my rights and royalties    Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away    To upstart unthrifts?   Wherefore was I born?    If that my cousin king be King of England,    It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.    You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;    Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,    He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,    To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.    I am denied to sue my livery here,    And yet my letters-patents give me leave:    My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold,    And these and all are all amiss employ'd.    What would you have me do?   I am a subject,    And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me;    And therefore, personally I lay my claim    To my inheritance of free descent.
Thou liest.
Not?
Nay, let's seek him:Then do we sin against our own estate,When we may profit meet, and come too late.
No, my lord, not I.
Past the mid season.
So many miseries have crazed my voiceThat my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
When will he be here?
Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I canplace thee, I will.
Most radiant, exquisite and unmatchable beautyI pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house, for I never saw her.   I would be loath to cast away my speech, for besides that it is excellently well penned, I have taken great pains to con it.   Good beauties, let me sustain no scorn.   I am very comptible, even to the leastsinister usage.
What misadventure is so early upThat calls our person from our morning rest?
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
(picks up the handkerchief)     I am glad I have found this napkin,    This was her first remembrance from the Moor.    My wayward husband hath a hundred times    Wooed me to steal it, but she so loves the token    (For he conjured her she should ever keep it)    That she reserves it evermore about her    To kiss and talk to. Ill have the work ta'en out    And give t Iago.   What he will do with it    Heaven knows, not I.    I nothing but to please his fantasy.
But now the blood of twenty thousand men    Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;    And, till so much blood thither come again,    Have I not reason to look pale and dead?    All souls that will be safe fly from my side,    For time hath set a blot upon my pride.
Sir, that's to-morrow.    I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance    Or breed upon our absence;   that may blow    No sneaking winds at home, to make us say    'This is put forth too truly:'   besides, I have stay'd    To tire your royalty.
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,Shell find a white that shall her blackness fit.
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared;    The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.    Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care    And what loss is it to be rid of care?    Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?    Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,    We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so:    Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend;    They break their faith to God as well as us:    Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:    The worst is death, and death will have his day.
'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king:    For when I was a king, my flatterers    Were then but subjects;   being now a subject,    I have a king here to my flatterer.    Being so great, I have no need to beg.
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'life, for then we are sure they are true.
Here, sir; what is your pleasure?
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.    My child? away with't!   Even thou, that hast    A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence    And see it instantly consumed with fire;    Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:    Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,    And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life,    With what thou else call'st thine.   If thou refuse    And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;    The bastard brains with these my proper hands    Shall I dash out.   Go, take it to the fire;    For thou set'st on thy wife.
Am I that name, Iago?
I cannot blame her. By Gods holy mother, She hath had too much wrong, and I repentMy part thereof that I have done to her.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps    Esteem   as foil wherein thou art to set    The precious jewel of thy home return.
Hastings and Edwards children, Grey and Rivers,    Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward,    Vaughan, and all that have miscarrièd    By underhand, corrupted, foul injustice,    If that your moody, discontented souls    Do through the clouds behold this present hour,    Even for revenge mock my destruction.    This is All Souls' Day, fellow, is it not?
And I wish, my liege,You had only in your silent judgment tried it,Without more overture.
Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?
No wonder, sir,But certainly a maid.
Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him;    There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food;    If any one relieves or pities him,    For the offence he dies. This is our doom:    Some stay to see him fasten'd in the earth.
(  aside  ) And O shall end, I hope.
Come, come, dispatch. 'Tis bootless to exclaim.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!O courteous Tybalt! Honest gentleman!That ever I should live to see thee dead.
Look, look. O heavy day!
These fifteen years! By my fay, a goodly nap. But did I never speak of all that time?
Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not hear a foot fall. We now are near his cell.
Faith, I know not what to say.
You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome,    By uproar sever'd, like a flight of fowl    Scatter'd by winds and high tempestuous gusts,    O, let me teach you how to knit again    This scatter'd corn into one mutual sheaf,    These broken limbs again into one body;    Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,    And she whom mighty kingdoms court'sy to,    Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,    Do shameful execution on herself.    But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,    Grave witnesses of true experience,    Cannot induce you to attend my words,     [To Lucius]     Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor,    When with his solemn tongue he did discourse    To love-sick Dido's sad attending ear    The story of that baleful burning night    When subtle Greeks surprised King Priam's Troy,    Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears,    Or who hath brought the fatal engine in    That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.    My heart is not compact of flint nor steel;    Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,    But floods of tears will drown my oratory,    And break my utterance, even in the time    When it should move you to attend me most,    Lending your kind commiseration.    Here is a captain, let him tell the tale;    Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.
Come, go with me into mine armoury;    Lucius, I'll fit thee; and withal, my boy,    Shalt carry from me to the empress' sons    Presents that I intend to send them both:    Come, come; thou'lt do thy message, wilt thou not?
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,Unfit for mine own purposes.
An armour, friends! I pray you, let me see it.    Thanks, fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses,    Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself;    And though it was mine own, part of my heritage,    Which my dead father did bequeath to me.    With this strict charge, even as he left his life,    'Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield    Twixt me and death;'   and pointed to this brace;    'For that it saved me,   keep it; in like necessity    The which the gods protect thee from!   may    defend thee.'    It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it;    Till the rough seas, that spare not any man,    Took it in rage, though calm'd have given't again:    I thank thee for't: my shipwreck now's no ill,    Since I have here my father's gift in's will.
Ho, whos here?
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,    We lose it not, so long as we can smile.    He bears the sentence well that nothing bears    But the free comfort which from thence he hears.    But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow    That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.    These sentences to sugar or to gall,    Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.    But words are words. I never yet did hear    That the bruised heart was piercèd through the ears.    I humbly beseech you, proceed to th' affairs of state.
And, with thy shame, thy father's sorrow die!
Nothing, my lord, or ifI know not what.
Fetch Desdemona hither.
He did.
I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.
What stay had we but Clarence? And hes gone.
He is as horribly conceited of him, and pants and lookspale, as if a bear were at his heels.
This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture ofNobody.
How now, Malvolio?
Margaret.
Ay, good fool.
Thus high, by thy advice    And thy assistance is King Richard seated.    But shall we wear these glories for a day,    Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,To an untirable and continuate goodness:He passes.
O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor    the commodity wages not with the danger:   therefore,    if in our youths we could pick up some pretty    estate, 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched.    Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods    will be strong with us for giving over.
Ceremony was but devised at first    To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,    Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;    But where there is true friendship, there needs none.    Pray, sit; more welcome are ye to my fortunes    Than my fortunes to me.
No, he doth but mistake the truth totally.
Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.
Say that again.    The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see:    'Tis very true, my grief lies all within;    And these external manners of laments    Are merely shadows to the unseen grief    That swells with silence in the tortured soul;    There lies the substance:   and I thank thee, king,    For thy great bounty, that not only givest    Me cause to wail but teachest me the way    How to lament the cause.   I'll beg one boon,    And then be gone and trouble you no more.    Shall I obtain it?
Here comes my noble gull-catcher.
O barbarous, beastly villains, like thyself!
You may;But bootless is your sight: he will not speak To any.
[as LUCENTIO]   'Tis some odd humor pricks him to this fashion,Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-appareled.
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,    And to make whores, a bawd. Hold up, you sluts,    Your aprons mountant:   you are not oathable,    Although, I know, you 'll swear, terribly swear    Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues    The immortal gods that hear you,   spare your oaths,    I'll trust to your conditions: be whores still;    And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,    Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up;    Let your close fire predominate his smoke,    And be no turncoats: yet may your pains, six months,    Be quite contrary:   and thatch your poor thin roofs    With burthens of the dead;some that were hang'd,    No matter:wear them, betray with them: whore still;    Paint till a horse may mire upon your face,    A pox of wrinkles!
He may command me as my sovereign,But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
Thy life hath it dishonored.
No; I will to Ireland to his majesty.    Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain,    We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.
May we not get access to her, my lord?
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
Ay, ay.
Now will I go to take some privy order    To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,    And to give order that no manner of person    Have any time recourse unto the princes.
I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,Or manage it to part these men with me.
She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.    Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!    I weep myself to think upon thy words.    Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this    For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lovest her.    Farewell.
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,    That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,    But rather loose her to an African,    Where she at least is banished from your eye,    Who hath cause to wet the grief on t.
Nay, nothing; all is said.    His tongue is now a stringless instrument;    Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
Why, sir, say if you had,Who takes offence at that would make me glad?
In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse.Therefore, for Gods sake, entertain good comfort And cheer his grace with quick and merry eyes.
No, my good lord; but Pluto sends you word,    If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall:    Marry, for Justice, she is so employ'd,    He thinks, with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else,    So that perforce you must needs stay a time.
But I hear no; they say my son of YorkHas almost overta'en him in his growth.
As thou    Wilt live, fly after:   and like an arrow shot    From a well-experienced archer hits the mark    His eye doth level at, so thou ne'er return    Unless thou say 'Prince Pericles is dead.'
So will I, Signior Gremio. But a word, I pray.  Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now upon advice, it toucheth us both, that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress  and be happy rivals in Biancas love, to labor and effect one thing specially.
The weary sun hath made a golden set,    And by the bright track of his fiery car,    Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow.    Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.    Give me some ink and paper in my tent;    Ill draw the form and model of our battle,    Limit each leader to his several charge,    And part in just proportion our small power.    My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,    And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.    The earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment    Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him,    And by the second hour in the morning    Desire the earl to see me in my tent.    Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me.    Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?
Here comes a messenger. What news?
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,    Both who he is and why he cometh hither    Thus plated in habiliments of war,    And formally, according to our law,    Depose him in the justice of his cause.
That's your superstition.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Be of good cheer, mother. How fares your Grace?
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantuas lawIs death to any he that utters them.
Sebastian is thy name? I like thee wellAnd will employ thee in some service presently.
And yet how nature, erring from itself
If I do not usurp myself, I am.
Lord Cerimon, my lord; this man,Through whom the gods have shown their power; that canFrom first to last resolve you.
What are we, Apemantus?
You charge me most unjustly.
The Duke does greet you, general,And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,Even on the instant.
O, let my sovereign turn away his face    And bid his ears a little while be deaf,    Till I have told this slander of his blood,    How God and good men hate so foul a liar.
Not to his fathers. I spoke with his man.
Here's the midwife's name to't, one MistressTale-porter, and five or six honest wives that werepresent. Why should I carry lies abroad?
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you withan iron wit and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.    [Sings]  When griping grief the heart doth wound    And doleful dumps the mind oppress,    Then music with her silver sound     [Speaks]   Why silver sound? Why music with her silversound? What say you, Simon Catling?
This is some monster of the isle with four legs who hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil should he learn our language? I will give him some relief if itbe but for that.   If I can recover him and keep him tameand get to Naples with him, hes a present for any emperor that ever trod on neats leather.
I will not.
It did, it did. Alas the day, it did.
Thou flatter'st misery.
Sir, my gracious lord,    To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:    O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,    The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured    With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,    Most goddess-like prank'd up:   but that our feasts    In every mess have folly and the feeders    Digest it with a custom, I should blush    To see you so attired, sworn, I think,    To show myself a glass.
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.
God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,To have some conference with your grace alone.
Yes, that I did, but that was but courtesy.
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter?    Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her!    For Ill refer me to all things of sense,    If she in chains of magic were not bound,    Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,    So opposite to marriage that she shunned    The wealthy curlèd darlings of our nation,    Would ever have, t' incur a general mock,    Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom    Of such a thing as thouto fear, not to delight.    Judge me the world if tis not gross in sense    That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,    Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals    That weakens motion. Ill have t disputed on.    'Tis probable and palpable to thinking.    I therefore apprehend and do attach thee    For an abuser of the world, a practicer    Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.    Lay hold upon him. If he do resist,    Subdue him at his peril!
Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.    Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold    Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:    O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,    That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!    Or, if misfortune miss the first career,    Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,    They may break his foaming courser's back,    And throw the rider headlong in the lists,    A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!    Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife    With her companion grief must end her life.
O, here isThe lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one!Is't not a goodly presence?
Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus:let's ha' some sport with 'em.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
I should so.    Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark    Her eye,   a   nd tell me for what dull part in't    You chose her;   then I'ld shriek, that even your ears    Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd    Should be 'Remember mine.'
John Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers,Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Before you can say Come and Go,    And breathe twice and cry So, so!    Each one, tripping on his toe,    Will be here with mop and mow.    Do you love me, master, no?
God give him joy!
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
What dost thou say, Iago?
'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.
Gentlemen, content ye. I am resolved.Go in, Bianca.
How does he love me?
Oh, most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say you, Cassio? Is he not a most profane and liberal counselor?
I will so. Whats the matter?
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,    That Lucentio indeed had Baptistas youngest daughter.    But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your masters, I advise    You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.    When I am alone, why then I am Tranio;    But in all places else, your master Lucentio.
I pray now, call her.Withdraw yourselves.
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
To sauce thy dishes.
Nor send you out o' th' way?
Wrench it open;Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense.
Give me the letter. I will look on it.  [Takes letter from BALTHASAR]  Where is the countys page, that raised the watch?Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
I did.
Why, so I did, but looked for no reply.O, let me make the period to my curse!
Where shall I meet you?
I.
To bed? Ay, sweetheart, and Ill come to thee.
Thats not the tune.
How now! How a dozen of virginities?
And me too, good Lord!
Ill be with thee betimes.
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!    If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,    I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,    And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,    And lies, and lies:   there is my bond of faith,    To tie thee to my strong correction.    As I intend to thrive in this new world,    Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:    Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say    That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men    To execute the noble duke at Calais.
Ursula, bring my picture here.    Go give your master this:   tell him from me,    One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,    Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
Hark, Tranio! Thou mayst hear Minerva speak.
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.Let's along.
Under yon yew trees lay thee all along,    Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground    So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,    Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,    But thou shalt hear it.   Whistle then to me,    As signal that thou hearst something approach.    Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
I know not, madam. 'Tis a fair young man, and well attended.
Renowned Lucius, from our troops I stray'd    To gaze upon a ruinous monastery;    And, as I earnestly did fix mine eye    Upon the wasted building, suddenly    I heard a child cry underneath a wall.    I made unto the noise; when soon I heard    The crying babe controll'd with this discourse:    'Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dam!    Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,    Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look,    Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor:    But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,    They never do beget a coal-black calf.    Peace, villain, peace!'even thus he rates    the babe,    'For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth;    Who, when he knows thou art the empress' babe,    Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.'    With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him,    Surprised him suddenly, and brought him hither,    To use as you think needful of the man.
Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!
Alack, for mercy!
[aside to SEBASTIAN]    Let it be tonight,    For now they are oppressed with travel.   They    Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance    As when they are fresh.
You will not own it.
O, then unfold the passion of my love,    Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith:    It shall become thee well to act my woes;    She will attend it better in thy youth    Than in a nuncios of more grave aspect.
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost. My grandam told me he was murdered there.
Who hath committed them?
'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.    How have I been behaved that he might stick    The smallst opinion on my least misuse?
Is not my lord seen yet?
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
I am very glad to see you, signior. Welcome to Cyprus.
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris, love?
[To VINCENTIO]  Why, how now, gentleman! Why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another mans name.
O, sir, I find her milder than she was;And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
[as LUCENTIO]  Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
My lords of England, let me tell you this:    I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs    And laboured all I could to do him right;    But in this kind to come, in braving arms,    Be his own carver and cut out his way,    To find out right with wrong, it may not be;    And you that do abet him in this kind    Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
I greet thy love    Not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous,    And will upon the instant put thee to t.    Within these three days let me hear thee say    That Cassios not alive.
I have been in such a pickle since I saw you last that,I fear me, will never out of my bones. I shall not fearflyblowing.
The swallow follows not summer more willing than weyour lordship.
[Aside]    That you are both decipher'd, that's the news,    For villains mark'd with rape.   May it please you,    My grandsire, well advised, hath sent by me    The goodliest weapons of his armoury    To gratify your honourable youth,    The hope of Rome; for so he bade me say;    And so I do, and with his gifts present    Your lordships,   that, whenever you have need,    You may be armed and appointed well:    And so I leave you both:     [Aside]     like bloody villains.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Run to my study.By and by!Gods will,What simpleness is this!I come, I come.
O, let those cities that of plenty's cup    And her prosperities so largely taste,    With their superfluous riots, hear these tears!    The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.    They were trained together in their childhoods; and    there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,    which cannot choose but branch now.   Since their    more mature dignities and royal necessities made    separation of their society,   their encounters,    though not personal, have been royally attorneyed    with interchange of gifts, letters, loving    embassies;   that they have seemed to be together,    though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and    embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed    winds.   The heavens continue their loves!
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,And do not call them bastards.
Never?
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?
With all my heart, sir.
As dissolute as desperate;   yet through both    I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years    May happily bring forth. But who comes here?
Cousin of Buckingham and sage, grave men,    Since you will buckle fortune on my back,    To bear her burden, whe'er I will or no,    I must have patience to endure the load;    But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach    Attend the sequel of your imposition,    Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me    From all the impure blots and stains thereof,    For God doth know, and you may partly see,    How far I am from the desire of this.
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ay, too well.
I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
It is my lord's.    That I was shipp'd at sea, I well remember,    Even on my eaning time;   but whether there    Deliver'd, by the holy gods,    I cannot rightly say.   But since King Pericles,    My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again,    A vestal livery will I take me to,    And never more have joy.
What stuff is this? How say you?    'Tis true, my brothers daughters Queen of Tunis,    So is she heir of Naples, twixt which regions    There is some space.
My lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom    Of good old Abraham!   Lords appellants,    Your differences shall all rest under gage    Till we assign you to your days of trial.
Prithee say true!
From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
I will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.
How now, mistress?
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter.
Heavens keep him from these beasts!For he is, sure, i' th' island.
Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face;    His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;    His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:    He prays but faintly and would be denied;    We pray with heart and soul and all beside:    His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;    Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:    His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;    Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.    Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have    That mercy which true prayer ought to have.
If at home, sir,    He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,    Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,    My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:    He makes a July's day short as December,    And with his varying childness cures in me    Thoughts that would thick my blood.
Oh, heaven have mercy on me!
Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened    Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.    Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts,    Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction.    No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt    Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,    To revel in the entrails of my lambs.    But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,    My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys    Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes,    And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death,    Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft,    Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
Tomorrow dinner, then?
It is, it is. Hie hence! Be gone, away!    It is the lark that sings so out of tune,    Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.    Some say the lark makes sweet division.    This doth not so, for she divideth us.    Some say the lark and loathèd toad change eyes.    Oh, now I would they had changed voices too,    Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,    Hunting thee hence with hunts-up to the day.    O, now be gone. More light and light it grows.
[aside]  A murd'rous villain, and so still thou art.
[to DORSET]     Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee.     [to ANNE]    Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee.     [to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee.    I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me.    Eighty-odd years of sorrow have I seen,    And each hours joy wracked with a week of teen.
See where his Grace stands, tween two clergymen.
Yes.
Go then, for 'tis in vainTo seek him here that means not to be found.
Why, then All Souls' Day is my bodys doomsday.    This is the day which, in King Edwards time,    I wished might fall on me when I was found    False to his children and his wifes allies.    This is the day wherein I wished to fall    By the false faith of him who most I trusted.    This, this All Souls' Day to my fearful soul    Is the determined respite of my wrongs.    That high All-seer which I dallied with    Hath turned my feignèd prayer on my head    And given in earnest what I begged in jest.    Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men    To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms.    Thus Margarets curse falls heavy upon my neck:    When he, quoth she, shall split thy heart with sorrow,    Remember Margaret was a prophetess.    Come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame.    Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Ha?
What do ye ask of me, my friend?
Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have    something to do with you.   Come, you're a young    foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have    you.
To you as much, sir! I am beholding to you    For your sweet music this last night:   I do    Protest my ears were never better fed    With such delightful pleasing harmony.
I have.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.Tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.
Not to kill him, having a warrant, but to be damned for killing him, from the which no warrant can defend me.
I have one myself,Who shall not be more dear to my respectThan yours, my lord.
What, is the man lunatic?
Can the son's eye behold his father bleed?There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed!
I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms.
Why, with my lord, madam.
Zounds, hold your peace.
O slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
O, do ye read, my lord, what she hath writ?'Stuprum. Chiron. Demetrius.'
And so she did.
And too soon marred are those so early made.    Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she.    Shes the hopeful lady of my earth.    But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart.    My will to her consent is but a part.    An she agreed within her scope of choice,    Lies my consent and fair according voice.    This night I hold an old accustomed feast,    Whereto I have invited many a guest    Such as I love. And you among the store,    One more, most welcome, makes my number more.    At my poor house look to behold this night    Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.    Such comfort as do lusty young men feel    When well-appareled April on the heel    Of limping winter treads.   Even such delight    Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night    Inherit at my house.   Hear all, all see,    And like her most whose merit most shall be    Which on more view of many, mine, being one,    May stand in number, though in reckoning none,    Come, go with me.    [To PETER, giving him a paper]    Go, sirrah, trudge about    Through fair Verona. Find those persons out    Whose names are written there, and to them say    My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.    The king mine uncle is to blame for it.    God will revenge it, whom I will importune    With earnest prayers, all to that effect.
Like aqua vitae with a midwife.
Now, good sweet Nurse O Lord, why lookst thou sad?    Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.    If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news    By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!    Thou wast the prettiest babe that eer I nursed.    An I might live to see thee married once,    I have my wish.
Ill send her to you presently,    And Ill devise a mean to draw the Moor    Out of the way,   that your converse and business    May be more free.
With drinking healths to my niece. Ill drink to her aslong as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria.   Hes a coward and a coistrel that will not drink to my niece till his brains turn o' th' toe like aparish top.   What, wench!    Castiliano vulgo    , for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.
Who is the second that presents himself?
Thaliard, adieu!
Heres neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all. And another storm brewing, I hear it sing i' th'wind. Yond same black cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor.   If it should thunder as it did before, I know not where to hide my head. Yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls.    [sees CALIBAN]    What have we here? A man or a fish? Dead or alive? A fish.   He smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish-like smell, a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-john. A strange fish!   Were I in England now, as once I was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but would give a pieceof silver. There would this monster make a man. Any strange beast there makes a man.   When they will not givea doit to relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like arms!   Warm, o' my troth. I do now let loose my opinion, hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt.
So thrive I as I truly swear the like.
Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor!
As now she might have done,    So much to my good comfort, as it is    Now piercing to my soul.   O, thus she stood,    Even with such life of majesty, warm life,    As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her!    I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me    For being more stone than it?   O royal piece,    There's magic in thy majesty, which has    My evils conjured to remembrance and    From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,    Standing like stone with thee.
This, this: no more, you gods!   your present kindness    Makes my past miseries sports: you shall do well,    That on the touching of her lips I may    Melt and no more be seen.   O, come, be buried    A second time within these arms.
Tut man, one fire burns out anothers burning.    One pain is lessened by anothers anguish.    Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning.    One desperate grief cures with anothers languish.    Take thou some new infection to thy eye,    And the rank poison of the old will die.
Hark, a drum!
I swear.
Stephano!
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
The poorest service is repaid with thanks,And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
Whats he that follows here, that would not dance?
If it be so,We need no grave to bury honesty:There's not a grain of it the face to sweetenOf the whole dungy earth.
Well then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,    And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings    How he doth stand affected to our purpose    And summon him tomorrow to the Tower    To sit about the coronation.    If thou dost find him tractable to us,    Encourage him and show him all our reasons.    If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,    Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,    And give us notice of his inclination;    For we tomorrow hold divided councils,    Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.
O thou pernicious caitiff!How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchiefThat was my wifes?
Villain, I'll make thee safe.
And that you would have me to do!
Richmond? When last I was at Exeter,    The mayor in courtesy showed me the castle    And called it Rougemont,   at which name I started,    Because a bard of Ireland told me once    I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
And died that day when Viola from her birthHad numbered thirteen years.
[to STEPHANO and TRINCULO]  Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,As we are mock'd with art.
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt knowThe treason that my haste forbids me show.
Madam.
Hark you, sir, you mean not her to
Ay, I do.
[to STEPHANO]  Lo, how he mocks me! Wilt thou let him, my lord?
You    sunburnt sicklemen of August weary,    Come hither from the furrow and be merry.    Make holiday.   Your rye-straw hats put on,    And these fresh nymphs encounter every one    In country footing.
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot,    For then this land was famously enriched    With politic grave counsel; then the king    Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.
My name is Marina.
How should this grow?
The Moor! I know his trumpet.
Take her hence:    Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover:    I have too much believed mine own suspicion:    Beseech you, tenderly apply to her    Some remedies for life.    [Exeunt PAULINA and Ladies, with HERMIONE]    Apollo, pardon    My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!    I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,    New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,    Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;    For, being transported by my jealousies    To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose    Camillo for the minister to poison    My friend Polixenes:   which had been done,    But that the good mind of Camillo tardied    My swift command, though I with death and with    Reward did threaten and encourage him,    Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane    And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest    Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here,    Which you knew great, and to the hazard    Of all encertainties himself commended,    No richer than his honour:   how he glisters    Thorough my rust! and how his pity    Does my deeds make the blacker!
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl,    That flies her fortune when it follows her.    I'll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour    Than for the love of reckless Silvia.
Peter!
Away with the dotard! To the jail with him!
Ay, Biddy, come with me.   What, man! 'Tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan. Hang him, foulcollier!
The fitter, then, the gods should have her. Hereshe comes weeping for her only mistress' death.Thou art resolved?
I am about it, but indeed my invention    Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze,    It plucks out brains and all. But my Muse labors    And thus she is delivered:    If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,    The ones for use, the other useth it.
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
Go, write it in a martial hand. Be curst and brief. Itis no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full of invention.   Taunt him with the license of ink.   If thou thou-est him some thrice, it shall not be amiss; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper, althoughthe sheet were big enough for the bed of Ware in England, set 'em down.   Go, about it. Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no matter. About it.
Marry, that marry is the very themeI came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,How stands your disposition to be married?
Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in Othellos place.
Prithee, let him.
Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.    And I resign my gage.   My dear dear lord,    The purest treasure mortal times afford    Is spotless reputation: that away,    Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.    A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest    Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.    Mine honour is my life; both grow in one:    Take honour from me, and my life is done:    Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;    In that I live and for that will I die.
[aside]  Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!O my accursèd womb, the bed of death!A cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world, Whose unavoided eye is murderous.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.    Your officer Iago can inform you,    While I spare speech, which something now offends me,    Of all that I do know.   Nor know I aught    By me thats said or done amiss this night,    Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,    And to defend ourselves it be a sin    When violence assails us.
Doth your highness call?
Now be you blest for it!I'll to the queen: please you,come something nearer.
Why, a horse.
You told a lie, an odious, damnèd lie.    Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie.    She false with Cassio! Did you say with Cassio?
Well, let it strike.
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
No, for then we should be colliers.
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.You rise to play and go to bed to work.
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,    And piece the way out with a heavy heart.    Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,    Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief;    One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;    Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard Each syllable that breath made up between them.
Villains, forbear! we are the empress' sons.
Hang her! I do but say what she is. So delicate with her needle, an admirable musician. Oh, she will sing thesavageness out of a bear! Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!
O Thou, whose captain I account myself,    Look on my forces with a gracious eye.    Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,    That they may crush down with a heavy fall    The usurping helmets of our adversaries!    Make us thy ministers of chastisement,    That we may praise thee in the victory!    To thee I do commend my watchful soul,    Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes.    Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!     [Sleeps]
I am not sorry neither. Id have thee live,For in my sense tis happiness to die.
It touches you, my lord, as much as me.
Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men;Then, if thou grant'st thou'rt a man, I have forgot thee.
I have spoke the least:Besides, his expedition promisesPresent approach.
Thou dost advise meEven so as I mine own course have set down:I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.
True, too true, my lord:If, one by one, you wedded all the world,Or from the all that are took something good,To make a perfect woman, she you kill'dWould be unparallel'd.
Tongue-tied, our queen?speak you.
Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent
But, hark! a sail.
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady. Wouldtwere done.
Alas, who knows?
Do not rise yet.    Witness, you ever-burning lights above,    You elements that clip us round about,    Witness that here Iago doth give up    The execution of his wit, hands, heart,    To wronged Othellos service.   Let him command,    And to obey shall be in me remorse,    What bloody business ever.
This cannot anger him. Twould anger him    To raise a spirit in his mistress circle    Of some strange nature, letting it there stand    Till she had laid it and conjured it down.    That were some spite. My invocation    Is fair and honest. In his mistress name    I conjure only but to raise up him.
Thou'rt a scholar. Let us therefore eat and drink. Marian,I say! A stoup of wine!
Ay, that I am not thee.
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,You said that idle weeds are fast in growth.The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
She will not.
Hast thou, spirit,Performed to point the tempest that I bade thee?
A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard.
After I have done what I promised?
Sir,You speak a language that I understand not:My life stands in the level of your dreams,Which I'll lay down.
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will bejustified in our loves; for indeed
Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,    My advocation is not now in tune.    My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him    Were he in favor as in humor altered.    So help me every spirit sanctified    As I have spoken for you all my best    And stood within the blank of his displeasure    For my free speech.   You must awhile be patient.    What I can do I will, and more I will    Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.
Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house,     [To Attendants]       And hither hale that misbelieving Moor,    To be adjudged some direful slaughtering death,    As punishment for his most wicked life.
In troth, I think I should, and undo t when I had done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition.   But for the whole world? Why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? I should venture purgatory for t.
Pray heaven it beState matters, as you think, and no conceptionNor no jealous toy concerning you.
My lord so please you, these things further thought on,    To think me as well a sister as a wife,    One day shall crown the alliance on t, so please you,    Here at my house and at my proper cost.
No, no, my dream was lengthened after life.    O, then began the tempest to my soul.    I passed, methought, the melancholy flood,    With that sour ferryman which poets write of,    Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.    The first that there did greet my stranger-soul    Was my great father-in-law, renownèd Warwick,    Who cried aloud, What scourge for perjury    Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?    And so he vanished. Then came wand'ring by    A shadow like an angel, with bright hair    Dabbled in blood,   and he shrieked out aloud    "Clarence is comefalse, fleeting, perjured Clarence,    That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury.    Seize on him, furies. Take him unto torment."    With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends    Environed me and howled in mine ears    Such hideous cries that with the very noise    I trembling waked,   and for a season after    Could not believe but that I was in hell,    Such terrible impression made my dream.
What is thy news then?
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
Theres fire ready. And therefore, good Grumio, the news.
Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when thecourtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.
[as LITIO]   The base is right; tis the base knave that jars.    [aside]   How fiery and forward our pedant is!    Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.     Pedascule    , Ill watch you better yet.
Rapine and Murder; therefore called so,Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:    You may my glories and my state depose,    But not my griefs; still am I king of those.
Why, would that have mended my hair?
Have thy desire.
I pray you, sir, what is he?
Else I should tell him,well, i' faith I should,    When all's spent, he 'ld be cross'd then, an he could.    'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,    That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
Your beauty was the cause of that effect    Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep    To undertake the death of all the world,    So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
(returns)    My lord, I would I might entreat your honor    To scan this thing no farther. Leave it to time.    Although tis fit that Cassio have his place,    For sure, he fills it up with great ability,    Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,    You shall by that perceive him and his means.    Note if your lady strain his entertainment    With any strong or vehement importunity.    Much will be seen in that.   In the meantime,    Let me be thought too busy in my fears    As worthy cause I have to fear I am    And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.
Call it by what you will, the day is yours;    And here, I hope, is none that envies it.    In framing an artist, art hath thus decreed,    To make some good, but others to exceed;    And you are her labour'd scholar.   Come, queen o'    the feast,    For, daughter, so you are,   here take your place:    Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace.
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first,And then I know after who comes by the worst.
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me    this other day, because I was no gentleman born.    See you these clothes? say you see them not and    think me still no gentleman born:   you were best say    these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the    lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest, Hence will I to my ghostly sire's close cell,His help to crave, and my deap hap to tell.
If you say, I hope you will not kill me.
Why then, thou hast it. Two deep enemies,    Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleeps disturbers,    Are they that I would have thee deal upon.    Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither,For he was fitter for that place than earth.
When holy and devout religious menAre at their beads, tis much to draw them thence,So sweet is zealous contemplation.
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!White-livered runagate, what doth he there?
Ill back to the duke of Gloucester and tell him so.
[To ROMEO]  O thou untaught! What manners is in this,To press before thy father to a grave?
And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,Good prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go.
I am afraid, sir,Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
By the gods, I have not:    Never did thought of mine levy offence;    Nor never did my actions yet commence    A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.
Bonos dies, Sir Toby. For, as the old hermit of Prague,that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a niece of King Gorboduc, That that is is.   So I, being Master Parson, am Master Parson. For, what is that butthat, and is but is?
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,    And bow my knee before his majesty:    For Mowbray and myself are like two men    That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;    Then let us take a ceremonious leave    And loving farewell of our several friends.
But that I do not.
How do you, Malvolio?
Speak to me. I shall answer for her. Your will?
Would? Nay, and I will.
Stand by me, Lucius; do not fear thine aunt.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,Remembering how I love thy company.
Go off, I discard you. Let me enjoy my private. Go off.
How if fair and foolish?
Sure, my noble lord,    If she be so abandoned to her sorrow    As it is spoke   , she never will admit me.
Why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me.    I did but tell her she mistook her frets,    And bowed her hand to teach her fingering,    When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,    'Frets' call you these? quoth she. Ill fume with them!    And with that word she struck me on the head,    And through the instrument my pate made way,    And there I stood amazèd for a while    As on a pillory, looking through the lute,    While she did call me rascal fiddler    And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms,    As had she studied to misuse me so.
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wifeTo come to me forthwith.
Lie    there, my art.   Wipe thou thine eyes. Have comfort.    The direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched    The very virtue of compassion in thee,    I have with such provision in mine art    So safely ordered that there is no soul    No, not so much perdition as an hair    Betid to any creature in the vessel    Which thou heardst cry, which thou sawst sink. Sit down.    For thou must now know farther.
Ay.
Then show it me.
[as LUCENTIO]  Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?
Make that good.
A dollar.
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other,     gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat and the humor of forty fancies pricked in t for a feather.   A monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian footboy or a gentlemans lackey.
A false conclusion. I hate it as an unfilled can.   To be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is early, sothat to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes.   Does not our life consist of the four elements?
Well, forward, forward! Thus the bowl should run,And not unluckily against the bias.But, soft! Company is coming here.
Thou shalt be lord of it and Ill serve thee.
The like to you kind Varro.
Ay, she quickly pooped him; she made him roast-meatfor worms. But I'll go search the market.
Well hast thou lesson'd us; this shall we do.    But would it please thee, good Andronicus,    To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son,    Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,    And bid him come and banquet at thy house;    When he is here, even at thy solemn feast,    I will bring in the empress and her sons,    The emperor himself and all thy foes;    And at thy mercy shalt they stoop and kneel,    And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.    What says Andronicus to this device?
Madam, an hour before the worshipped sun    Peered forth the golden window of the east,    A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,    Where, underneath the grove of sycamore    That westward rooteth from this city side,    So early walking did I see your son.    Towards him I made, but he was ware of me    And stole into the covert of the wood.    I, measuring his affections by my own,    Which then most sought where most might not be found,    Being one too many by my weary self,    Pursued my humor not pursuing his,    And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.
Good sooth, even thus. Therefore, ha' done with words:    To me shes married, not unto my clothes.    Could I repair what she will wear in me    As I can change these poor accoutrements,    'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.    But what a fool am I to chat with you,    When I should bid good morrow to my bride    And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?Call forth the holy father.
You are gentlemen of brave mettle. You would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!
Ay, sir, they be ready. The oats have eaten the horses.
Ay, forsooth.
A noble duke, in natureAs in name.
No, good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer. Some mollification for your giant, sweet lady.
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;    Not like a corse;   or if, not to be buried,    But quick and in mine arms.   Come, take your flowers:    Methinks I play as I have seen them do    In Whitsun pastorals:   sure this robe of mine    Does change my disposition.
But is he often thus?
O, sir, let it not trouble you.
I do not understand.
Stars, stars,And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;I'll have no wife, Paulina.
We wait upon your Grace.
Unless another,As like Hermione as is her picture,Affront his eye.
Why, theres a wench! Come on and kiss me, Kate.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.Anon, good Nurse!Sweet Montague, be true.Stay but a little. I will come again.
An we do not, it is pity of our lives.
[Aside]     Too hot, too hot!    To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.    I have    tremor cordis    on me: my heart dances;    But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment    May a free face put on, derive a liberty    From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,    And well become the agent; 't may, I grant;    But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,    As now they are, and making practised smiles,    As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere    The mort o' the deer;   O, that is entertainment    My bosom likes not, nor my brows!   Mamillius,    Art thou my boy?
Now, by Saint Peters Church and Peter too,    He shall not make me there a joyful bride.    I wonder at this haste, that I must wed    Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.    I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,    I will not marry yet.   And when I do, I swear    It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,    Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
What stay had I but Edward? And hes gone.
[to MIRANDA]     Oh, if a virgin,    And your affection not gone forth,   Ill make you    The queen of Naples.
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm!    It is hypocrisy against the devil.    They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,    The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
What is itTo me, my father?
[sings]      Come unto these yellow sands,    And then take hands.    Curtsied when you have, and kissed    The wild waves whist.    Foot it featly here and there,    And, sweet sprites, bear    The burden. Hark, hark!
The son of Clarence have I pent up close,    His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,    The sons of Edward sleep in Abrahams bosom,    And Anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight.    Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims    At young Elizabeth, my brothers daughter,    And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,    To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
Saw you the king today, my lord of Derby?
Stand you awhile apart,    Confine yourself but in a patient list.    Whilst you were here o'erwhelmèd with your grief    A passion most resulting such a man    Cassio came hither. I shifted him away    And laid good scuses upon your ecstasy,    Bade him anon return and here speak with me,    The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,    And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns    That dwell in every region of his face.    For I will make him tell the tale anew    Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when    He hath, and is again to cope your wife.    I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,    Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,    And nothing of a man.
Honest, my lord?
Mates, maid? how mean you that? No mates for you Unless you were of gentler, milder mold.
What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?
As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.O you most potent gods! what's here? a corse!
Let me see your eyes.Look in my face.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,    Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,    On pain to be found false and recreant,    To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,    A traitor to his God, his king and him;    And dares him to set forward to the fight.
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course    Is this of hers!   Lord Cardinal, will your Grace    Persuade the queen to send the duke of York    Unto his princely brother presently?    If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,    And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?
O heavens themselves!
What, think you we are Turks or infidels?    Or that we would, against the form of law,    Proceed thus rashly in the villains death,    But that the extreme peril of the case,    The peace of England and our persons' safety    Enforced us to this execution?
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread, thou thimble,    Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!    Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter cricket thou!    Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?    Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,    Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard    As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livst!    I tell thee, I, that thou hast marred her gown.
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know. From this time forth I never will speak word.
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him,Of whence he is, his name and parentage.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
No, my good lord.
Lady, amen.
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
Why, your herb-woman; she that sets seeds and roots    of shame and iniquity.   O, you have heard something    of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious    wooing.   But I protest to thee, pretty one, my    authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly    upon thee.   Come, bring me to some private place:    come, come.
The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,Against thy entrance.
No, well reason with him.
Now, forward with your tale.Prithee, stand farther off.
I mean, she is brought a-bed.
How say you by this change?
Give me my veil. Come, throw it o'er my face.  [OLIVIA puts on a veil]  Well once more hear Orsinos embassy.
And wilt thou learn of me?
What is the matter?
I may, and will, if she be so contented.    She will be pleased.   Then wherefore should I doubt?    Hap what hap may, Ill roundly go about her.    It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
Why, this is not a boon,    'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,    Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,    Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit    To your own person.   Nay, when I have a suit    Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed    It shall be full of poise and difficult weight    And fearful to be granted.
Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.
Ay, sir.
I care not.
Why, very well then. You must not think then that I am drunk.
Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the image of it leaves him he must run mad.
I believe you;    Your honour and your goodness teach me to't,    Without your vows.   Till she be married, madam,    By bright Diana, whom we honour, all    Unscissor'd shall this hair of mine remain,    Though I show ill in't. So I take my leave.    Good madam, make me blessed in your care    In bringing up my child.
[To   FABIAN   ]  I have his horse to take up the quarrel. Ihave persuaded him the youths a devil.
Why, as I told thee, tis a custom with him,    I' th' afternoon to sleep. There thou mayst brain him,    Having first seized his books;   or with a log    Batter his skull; or paunch him with a stake;    Or cut his weasand with thy knife.   Remember    First to possess his books, for without them    Hes but a sot, as I am, nor hath not    One spirit to command. They all do hate him    As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.    He has brave utensilsfor so he calls them    Which when he has a house, hell deck withal.    And that most deeply to consider is    The beauty of his daughter.   He himself    Calls her a nonpareil. I never saw a woman,    But only Sycorax my dam and she.    But she as far surpasseth Sycorax    As greatst does least.
I am glad to see your honour in good health.
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
O this learning, what a thing it is!
My lord, good morrow. Good morrow, Catesby.You may jest on, but, by the Holy Rood,I do not like these several councils, I.
Boult, has she any qualities?
Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription ofthese letters: I know not which is which.
Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh    To think it should leave crying and say ay.    And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow    A bump as big as a young cockerels stone,    A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.    Yea, quoth my husband, Fallst upon thy face?    Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age.    Wilt thou not, Jule? It stinted and said ay.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,    On pain to be found false and recreant,    Both to defend himself and to approve    Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,    To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal;    Courageously and with a free desire    Attending but the signal to begin.
Think, my lord?
And in good time here the lieutenant comes.Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,How doth the prince and my young son of York?
O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ringto Madam Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths,    And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart.    How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!    O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!    Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me    Such an immodest raiment, if shame live    In a disguise of love:    It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,    Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
Five thousand mine.
Saddle my horse.God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
Do t, knight. Ill write thee a challenge. Or Ill deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
Still you keep o' the windy side of the law. Good.
Prithee, keep up thy quillets. Theres a poor piece of gold for thee. If the gentlewoman that attends the generals wife be stirring,   tell her theres one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. Wilt thou do this?
Good morrow, Katefor thats your name, I hear.
Nay, but say true, does it work upon him?
Now, fair befall thee, good Petruchio!    The wager thou hast won, and I will add    Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,  Another dowry to another daughter,For she is changed as she had never been.
Sent by the king your father    To greet him and to give him comforts.   Sir,    The manner of your bearing towards him, with    What you as from your father shall deliver,    Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down:    The which shall point you forth at every sitting    What you must say; that he shall not perceive    But that you have your father's bosom there    And speak his very heart.
Chop off his head. Something we will determine.    And look when I am king,   claim thou of me    The earldom of Hereford,   and all the moveables    Whereof the king my brother was possessed.
It is not good to cross him; give him way.
Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints    With dry convulsions,   shorten up their sinews    With agèd cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them    Than pard or cat o' mountain.
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.
Accursèd and unquiet wrangling days,    How many of you have mine eyes beheld?    My husband lost his life to get the crown,    And often up and down my sons were tossed    For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss.    And being seated, and domestic broils    Clean overblown, themselves the conquerors    Make war upon themselves, brother to brother,    Blood to blood, self against self.   O, preposterous    And frantic outrage, end thy damnèd spleen,    Or let me die, to look on death no more.
Marry, will I. Kneel and repeat it. I will stand, and so shallTrinculo.
Now let me see if I can construe it.  Hic ibat Simois  , I know you not,  hic est Sigeia tellus  , I trust you not,  Hic steterat Priami  , take heed he hear us not,  regia  , presume not,  celsa   senis,  despair not.
Is it new and old too? How may that be?
[Reads]  Hermione is chaste;Polixenes blameless; Camillo a true subject; Leontesa jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten;and the king shall live without an heir, if thatwhich is lost be not found.
Oh, the people in the street cry Romeo,Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all runWith open outcry toward our monument.
Get you gone, sirrah.
Out, alas!    You'd be so lean, that blasts of January    Would blow you through and through.    Now, my fair'st friend,    I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might    Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,    That wear upon your virgin branches yet    Your maidenheads growing:   O Proserpina,    For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall    From Dis's waggon!   daffodils,    That come before the swallow dares, and take    The winds of March with beauty;   violets dim,    But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes    Or Cytherea's breath;   pale primroses    That die unmarried, ere they can behold    Bright Phoebus in his strengtha malady    Most incident to maids;   bold oxlips and    The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,    The flower-de-luce being one!   O, these I lack,    To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,    To strew him o'er and o'er!
Thy lips rot off!
Must it be so? it must not be. My lords,I do beseech you, know me.
Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head. If you provea mutineer, the next tree. The poor monsters my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.
I am sworn,And will dispatch.  [He seizes her]
Where is he?
I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.
Why, is he not with the queen?
Come, sir, your passado.
I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.
Cut my heart in sums.
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks. I would the fool were married to her grave!
We are tougher, brother,Than you can put us to't.
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage    That Norfolk lies:   here do I throw down this,    If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.
I do beseech you,    Send for the lady to the Sagittary,    And let her speak of me before her father.    If you do find me foul in her report    The trust, the office I do hold of you,    Not only take away, but let your sentence    Even fall upon my life.
Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from    thee:   yet for the outside of thy poverty we must    make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly,    thou must think there's a necessity in't,and    change garments with this gentleman:   though the    pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee,    there's some boot.
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Whats the matter with thee now?
You shall.
I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
Well, I will be so much a sinner, to be a double-dealer.Theres another. (  giving a coin  )
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards. This wide-chopped rascalwould thou mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!
I cry thee mercy, then, for I did thinkThat thou hadst called me all these bitter names.
[within]  If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear.Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.    If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,    We could at once put us in readiness    And take a lodging fit to entertain    Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.    But stay awhile. What company is this?
Courage enough: I do not fear the flaw;    It hath done to me the worst.   Yet, for the love    Of this poor infant, this fresh-new sea-farer,    I would it would be quiet.
'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call meknave. Begin, Fool. It begins Hold thy peace.
Cease; no more.You smell this business with a sense as coldAs is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel'tAs you feel doing thus; and see withalThe instruments that feel.
Grumio, my horse.
Know thus far forth:    By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune    (Now my dear lady) hath mine enemies    Brought to this shore.   And by my prescience    I find my zenith doth depend upon    A most auspicious star,   whose influence    If now I court not but omit, my fortunes    Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions.    Thou art inclined to sleep. 'Tis a good dullness,    And give it way. I know thou canst not choose.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
Zounds, who is there?
And shakes his threatening swordAgainst the walls of Athens.
They have here propertied me, keep me in darkness, sendministers to me   asses!and do all they can to face me out of my wits.
WhyDoth it not then our eyelids sink? I find notMyself disposed to sleep.
O, then I see you will part but with light gifts.In weightier things youll say a beggar nay.
The dignity of this act was worth the audience ofkings and princes; for by such was it acted.
[Draws his sword]   Draw, Benvolio. Beat down their weapons.    Gentlemen, for shame! Forbear this outrage.    Tybalt, Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath    Forbidden bandying in Verona streets.    Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.
I will do't; but yet she is a goodly creature.
Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.
Why, let her except, before excepted.
Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, wilt thou?Blow, and split thyself.
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
God give your Graces bothA happy and a joyful time of day.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,    For in Baptistas keep my treasure is.    He hath the jewel of my life in hold,    His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,    And her withholds from me and other more,    Suitors to her and rivals in my love,    Supposing it a thing impossible,    For those defects I have before rehearsed,    That ever Katherina will be wooed.    Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,    That none shall have access unto Bianca    Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
[Returning]  His name is Romeo, and a Montague,The only son of your great enemy.
First, as you know, my house within the city    Is richly furnishèd with plate and gold,    Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;    My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry,    In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns,    In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,    Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,    Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,    Valance of Venice gold in needlework,    Pewter and brass, and all things that belong    To house or housekeeping.   Then, at my farm    I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,    Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,    And all things answerable to this portion.    Myself am struck in years, I must confess,    And if I die tomorrow this is hers,    If whilst I live she will be only mine.
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive? How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear    That makes thee strangle thy propriety.    Fear not, Cesario.   Take thy fortunes up.    Be that thou knowst thou art, and then thou art    As great as that thou fearst.
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,    With clog of conscience and sour melancholy    Hath yielded up his body to the grave;    But here is Carlisle living, to abide    Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
(  seeing the letter  ) What employment have we here?
Alas, poor soul!
How this lord is follow'd!
I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though ignorance were as dark as hell.   And I say, there was never man thus abused.   I am no more mad than you are. Make the trial of it in any constant question.
Thou most lying slave,    Whom stripes may move, not kindness!   I have used thee,    Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee    In mine own cell till thou didst seek to violate    The honor of my child.
Hang him, he'll abuse us.
I do beseech you,    Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,    As, I confess, it is my natures plague    To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy    Shapes faults that are not,   that your wisdom,    From one that so imperfectly conceits,    Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble    Out of his scattering and unsure observance.    It were not for your quiet nor your good,    Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom    To let you know my thoughts.
What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir. See where he looks out of the window.
First, what is your place?
I think not so, my lord.
Good, good.
What was he that you followed with your sword? What hadhe done to you?
My lord,    Go then; and with a countenance as clear    As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia    And with your queen.   I am his cupbearer:    If from me he have wholesome beverage,    Account me not your servant.
My nyas?
Please it your lordship, he hath put me off    To the succession of new days this month:    My master is awaked by great occasion    To call upon his own, and humbly prays you    That with your other noble parts you'll suit    In giving him his right.
As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.
Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you,    Ift be your pleasure and most wise consent    (As partly I find it is) that your fair daughter    At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night    Transported with no worse nor better guard    But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,    To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor,    If this be known to you and your allowance,    We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.    But if you know not this my manners tell me    We have your wrong rebuke.   Do not believe    That, from the sense of all civility,    I thus would play and trifle with your reverence.    Your daughter (if you have not given her leave)    I say again, hath made a gross revolt,    Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes    In an extravagant and wheeling stranger    Of here and everywhere.   Straight satisfy yourself.    If she be in her chamber or your house,    Let loose on me the justice of the state    For thus deluding you.
My lord, you take us even at the best.
Theres nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.If the ill spirit have so fair a house,Good things will strive to dwell with t.
Is it upon record, or else reportedSuccessively from age to age, he built it?
[as LUCENTIO]  Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid! And come to Padua, careless of your life?
So,    They are well dispatch'd; now to my daughter's letter:    She tells me here, she'd wed the stranger knight,    Or never more to view nor day nor light.    'Tis well, mistress; your choice agrees with mine;    I like that well: nay, how absolute she's in't,    Not minding whether I dislike or no!    Well, I do commend her choice;    And will no longer have it be delay'd.    Soft! here he comes: I must dissemble it.
O bloody Richard! Miserable England,    I prophesy the fearfullst time to thee    That ever wretched age hath looked upon.    Come, lead me to the block. Bear him my head.    They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.
If that thy valour stand on sympathy,    There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:    By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,    I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it    That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.    If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest;    And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,    Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
Speakest thou from thy heart?
Why, now I see theres mettle in thee, and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than everbefore. Give me thy hand, Roderigo.   Thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy affair.
And then to have the humor of state, and after a demuretravel of regard,   telling them I know my place as I would they should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman Toby
No such matter, sir. I do live by the church; for I dolive at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.
Wherefore weep you?
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate    A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,    And then betwixt me and my married wife.    Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;    And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.    Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,    Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;    My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,    She came adorned hither like sweet May,    Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
Will you deny me now?    Is t possible that my deserts to you    Can lack persuasion?   Do not tempt my misery,    Lest that it make me so unsound a man    As to upbraid you with those kindnesses    That I have done for you.
Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive.    And since you do profess to be a suitor,    You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,    To whom we all rest generally beholding.
Ill make one too.
A cause more promising    Than a wild dedication of yourselves    To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain    To miseries enough; no hope to help you,    But as you shake off one to take another;    Nothing so certain as your anchors, who    Do their best office, if they can but stay you    Where you'll be loath to be:   besides you know    Prosperity's the very bond of love,    Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together    Affliction alters.
Indeed?
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
[as CAMBIO]  Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait.  [aside]  And watch withal, for, but I be deceived,Our fine musician groweth amorous.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.    Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.    Give me a case to put my visage in!    A visor for a visor.   What care I    What curious eye doth cote deformities?    Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
I will not sup tonight. Give me some ink and paper.What, is my beaver easier than it was?And all my armor laid into my tent?
Go call him hither.
Sir, are not you my father?
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,    And both return back to their chairs again:    Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound    While we return these dukes what we decree.
Go, Cleomenes;Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange He thus should steal upon us.
My lord, I hear.
What shall I swear by?
What do you think?
Surrey, thou liest.
Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd?
What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
More welcome is the stroke of death to meThan Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.
Is it so brave a lass?
Oh, wonder!    How many goodly creatures are there here!    How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,    That has such people in t!
I have heard too much, and your words and performances are no kin together.
Hold your peaces.
Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath adaughter of most rare note: the report of her isextended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
[Picking his pocket]  Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. You ha' done mea charitable office.
Not in a grave,To lay one in, another out to have.
Put up your sword. If this young gentleman    Have done offence, I take the fault on me.    If you offend him, I for him defy you.
How, my pretty York? I prithee let me hear it.
Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate.Talkers are no good doers. Be assured We go to use our hands and not our tongues.
Sooth, but you must.    Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,    Hath for your love a great a pang of heart    As you have for Olivia.   You cannot love her.    You tell her so. Must she not then be answered?
That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.
Ay, ay. Oh, lay me by my mistress' side.
What is the matter with our cousin now?
You know me, Apemantus?
How came the noble Timon to this change?
I hope better.
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not. Let me go.
And I will follow, more for Silvia's loveThan hate of Eglamour that goes with her.
What a pestilent knave is this same!
Tell her, Emilia.I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from'tAs boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubtedI shall do good.
Why, then hell say we stabbed him sleeping.
Yea, yea, my lord. Ill yield him thee asleep,Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.
This shall determine that.
My lord, I hear none.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,Being all this time abandoned from your bed.
Say on: an if it please me which thou speak'stThy child shall live, and I will see it nourish'd.
Your honor is most welcome.
[reads]  Thou killest me like a rogue and a villain.
Ay, ay, the cords.
Of Athens here, my lord.
All covered dishes!
Welcome, my lord! how far off lies your power?
What's her price, Boult?
I must confess your offer is the best,    And, let your father make her the assurance,    She is your own;   else, you must pardon me.    If you should die before him, wheres her dower?
Tut, fear not me.
I called thee then vain flourish of my fortune.    I called thee then poor shadow, painted queen,    The presentation of but what I was,    The flattering index of a direful pageant,    One heaved a-high, to be hurled down below,    A mother only mocked with two fair babes,    A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag    To be the aim of every dangerous shot,    A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble,    A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.    Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?    Where are thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?    Who sues and kneels and says God save the queen?    Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?    Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?    Decline all this, and see what now thou art:    For happy wife, a most distressèd widow;    For joyful mother, one that wails the name;    For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care;    For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;    For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me;    For she being feared of all, now fearing one;    For she commanding all, obeyed of none.    Thus hath the course of justice whirled about    And left thee but a very prey to time,    Having no more but thought of what thou wast    To torture thee the more, being what thou art.    Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not    Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?    Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke,    From which even here I slip my weary head    And leave the burthen of it all on thee.    Farewell, Yorks wife, and queen of sad mischance.    These English woes will make me smile in France.
Look to the boy.
By my troth, I would not undertake her in this company.Is that the meaning of accost?
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;go on the right hand: I will but look upon thehedge and follow you.
My husband!
Who should I swear by? thou believest no god:That granted, how canst thou believe an oath?
[to ALONSO]  Anddo you mark me, sir?
O God, I have an ill-divining soul.    Methinks I see thee now, thou art so low    As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.    Either my eyesight fails, or thou lookst pale.
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
Ha, banishment! Be merciful, say death,For exile hath more terror in his look,Much more than death. Do not say banishment.
[to FERDINAND]    Follow me.     [to MIRANDA]    Speak not you for him. Hes a traitor.     [to FERDINAND]    Come,    Ill manacle thy neck and feet together.    Seawater shalt thou drink.   Thy food shall be    The fresh-brook muscles, withered roots, and husks    Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe t.    That she loves him, tis apt and of great credit.    The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,    Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,    And I dare think hell prove to Desdemona    A most dear husband.   Now, I do love her too,    Not out of absolute lustthough peradventure    I stand accountant for as great a sin    But partly led to diet my revenge,    For that I do suspect the lusty Moor    Hath leaped into my seat.   The thought whereof    Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,    And nothing can or shall content my soul    Till I am evened with him, wife for wife.    Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor    At least into a jealousy so strong    That judgment cannot cure.   Which thing to do,    If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace    For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,    Ill have our Michael Cassio on the hip,    Abuse him to the Moor in the right garb    (For I fear Cassio with my night-cape too)    Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me    For making him egregiously an ass    And practicing upon his peace and quiet    Even to madness.   'Tis here, but yet confused.    Knaverys plain face is never seen till used.
Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me;Or else I'll call my brother back again,And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.
And why so, my lord?
What of his heart perceive you in his face By any livelihood he showed today?
'Tis a good form.
A match!
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.  [falls asleep]
Belike some noble gentleman that means,Traveling some journey, to repose him here.
Not a dump, we. Tis no time to play now.
Zounds! You rogue! You rascal!
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceitedfellow. Has he any unbraided wares?
Fair sir, and you, my merry mistress,    That with your strange encounter much amazed me,    My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,    And bound I am to Padua,   there to visit    A son of mine which long I have not seen.
A beggar, brother?
Yes, if you love me, sir.
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.
Hail, most royal sir!
You have not been abed, then?
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby    Am I;   who ready here do stand in arms,    To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,    In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,    That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,    To God of heaven, King Richard and to me;    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
My prettiest Perdita!    But O, the thorns we stand upon!   Camillo,    Preserver of my father, now of me,    The medicine of our house, how shall we do?    We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son,    Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years    Hath not yet dived into the worlds deceit;    Nor more can you distinguish of a man    Than of his outward show, which, God He knows,    Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.    Those uncles which you want were dangerous.    Your Grace attended to their sugared words    But looked not on the poison of their hearts.    God keep you from them, and from such false friends.
Go, take him away, and hang him presently.
What trade, sir?
And whats the news, good cousin Lodovico?
[as LUCENTIO]   Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.    Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?    Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer.    Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.
Tell out my blood.
What, canst thou say all this, and never blush?
And so do I too, lieutenant.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Say on, my loving lord.
He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side,    But in conclusion put strange speech upon me.    I know not what twas but distraction.
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,    As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth    Controlling majesty:   alack, alack, for woe,    That any harm should stain so fair a show!
First, know my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.
Fortune speed us!Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.
No, but she let it drop by negligenceAnd, to th' advantage, I being here, took t up.Look, here it is.
If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on    To castigate thy pride, 'twere well: but thou    Dost it enforcedly; thou'ldst courtier be again,    Wert thou not beggar.   Willing misery    Outlives encertain pomp, is crown'd before:    The one is filling still, never complete;    The other, at high wish: best state, contentless,    Hath a distracted and most wretched being,    Worse than the worst, content.    Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.
Tell him he shall not speak with me.
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean togive thee none.
My commissionIs not to reason of the deed, but do it.
Why, sir, her names a word, and to dally with that word might make my sister wanton.   But, indeed, words arevery rascals since bonds disgraced them.
Great king,    Few love to hear the sins they love to act;    'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.    Who has a book of all that monarchs do,    He's more secure to keep it shut than shown:    For vice repeated is like the wandering wind.    Blows dust in other's eyes, to spread itself;    And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,    The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear:    To stop the air would hurt them.   The blind mole casts    Copp'd hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throng'd    By man's oppression; and the poor worm doth die for't.    Kings are earth's gods; in vice their law's their will;    And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill?    It is enough you know; and it is fit,    What being more known grows worse, to smother it.    All love the womb that their first being bred,    Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
Will't please you eat? will't please yourhighness feed?
No, forbear.    The lethargy must have his quiet course.    If not, he foams at mouth and by and by    Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.    Do you withdraw yourself a little while,    He will recover straight. When he is gone    I would on great occasion speak with you.
No, no, my lord.
What sayest thou, Biondello?
Mistake no more. I am not Litio,    Nor a musician as I seem to be,    But one that scorn to live in this disguise    For such a one as leaves a gentleman    And makes a god of such a cullion.    Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.
Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived,    Signior Baptista may remember me,    Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,    Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
Come, bring in all together.
O, make for Tarsus!    There will I visit Cleon, for the babe    Cannot hold out to Tyrus:   there I'll leave it    At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner:    I'll bring the body presently.
But as well? Then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits than a fool.
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery;    That see I by our faces; we are fellows still,    Serving alike in sorrow:   leak'd is our bark,    And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,    Hearing the surges threat: we must all part    Into this sea of air.
There is besides in Roderigos letter    How he upbraids Iago, that he made him    Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came    That I was cast.   And even but now he spake,    After long seeming deadIago hurt him,    Iago set him on.
His word is more than the miraculous harp. He hath raised the wall and houses too.
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,    Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.    What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?
Farewell, my Desdemona. Ill come to thee straight.
If it be not for some purpose of import,Give t me again. Poor lady, shell run madWhen she shall lack it.
Here's ado,To lock up honesty and honour fromThe access of gentle visitors!Is't lawful, pray you,To see her women? any of them? Emilia?
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Be not acknown on t,I have use for it. Go, leave me.
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too,For they that were your enemies are hisAnd have prevailed as much on him as you.
I will, my lord.
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
Something, sure, of state,    Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice    Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,    Hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases    Mens natures wrangle with inferior things,    Though great ones are their object.   'Tis even so,    For let our finger ache and it endues    Our other healthful members even to that sense    Of pain.   Nay, we must think men are not gods,    Nor of them look for such observances    As fit the bridal.   Beshrew me much, Emilia,    I was, unhandsome warrior as I am,    Arraigning his unkindness with my soul,    But now I find I had suborned the witness,    And hes indicted falsely.
My lord, in the base court he doth attendTo speak with you; may it please you to come down.
Close by, my master.
Ye say honestly. Rest you merry.
[to RICHARD]    Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,    And in a bloody battle end thy days.    Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die!     [to RICHMOND]    Quiet, untroubled soul, awake, awake.    Arm, fight, and conquer for fair Englands sake.
You gods, reward them!    Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows    Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:    Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;    'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;    And nature, as it grows again toward earth,    Is fashion'd for the journey, dull and heavy.
The sun will not be seen today.    The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.    I would these dewy tears were from the ground.    Not shine today? Why, what is that to me    More than to Richmond, for the selfsame heaven    That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used. Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
Or as twere perfumed by a fen.
There will little learning die then, that day thou    art hanged.   This is to Lord Timon; this to    Alcibiades. Go; thou wast born a bastard, and thou't    die a bawd.
I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love,    wherein by the color of his beard, the shape of his leg,the manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and complexion, he shall find himself most feelingly personated.   I can write very like my lady yourniece: on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands.
No matter what; he's poor, and that's revenge    enough.   Who can speak broader than he that has no    house to put his head in? such may rail against    great buildings.
Is t so saucy?
(aside to RODERIGO)  Away, I say, go out, and cry a mutiny.
[aside]  And that his bags shall prove.
Good, good, the justice of it pleases! Very good!
Hes that he is. I may not breathe my censureWhat he might be. If what he might he is not,I would to heaven he were!
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.
Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes    Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:    Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.    Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.
So, so, my lord.
Have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.
[coming forward]  My lord?
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender    Of my childs love. I think she will be ruled    In all respects by me.   Nay, more, I doubt it not.    Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.    Acquaint her here of my son Paris love,    And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next    But, soft! What day is this?
I have a jewel here
Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy.    Then take him up and manage well the jest.    Carry him gently to my fairest chamber    And hang it round with all my wanton pictures.    Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters    And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet.    Procure me music ready when he wakes,    To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound.    And if he chance to speak, be ready straight    And with a low submissive reverence    Say, What is it your Honor will command?    Let one attend him with a silver basin    Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers,    Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,    And say, Will t please your Lordship cool your hands?    Someone be ready with a costly suit    And ask him what apparel he will wear.    Another tell him of his hounds and horse,    And that his lady mourns at his disease.    Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,    And when he says he is, say that he dreams,    For he is nothing but a mighty lord.    This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs.    It will be pastime passing excellent    If it be husbanded with modesty.
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to layon thee, rather than have these off.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work, For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
Shes a most exquisite lady.
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,    I would my skill were subject to thy curse.    Here did she fall a tear; here in this place    I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:    Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,    In the remembrance of a weeping queen.
An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst never draw sword again.
I never knew a Florentine more kind and honest.
A bridegroom, say you? 'Tis a groom indeed,A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
But are they, Ariel, safe?
What is six winters? they are quickly gone.
Withdraw yourself awhile. Ill go with you.
How!
Nay, but he prated    And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms    Against your honor    That, with the little godliness I have,    I did full hard forbear him.   But I pray you, sir,    Are you fast married? Be assured of this:    That the Magnifico is much beloved    And hath in his effect a voice potential    As double as the Dukes.   He will divorce you,    Or put upon you what restraint and grievance    The law (with all his might to enforce it on)    Will give him cable.
How, how, Lychorida!
If he govern the country, you are bound to himindeed; but how honourable he is in that, I know not.
Why, I was writing of my epitaph;    it will be seen to-morrow:   my long sickness    Of health and living now begins to mend,    And nothing brings me all things.   Go, live still;    Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,    And last so long enough!
Return again, and take an oath with thee.    Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;    Swear by the duty that you owe to God    Our part therein we banish with yourselves    To keep the oath that we administer:    You never shall, so help you truth and God!    Embrace each other's love in banishment;    Nor never look upon each other's face;    Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile    This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;    Nor never by advised purpose meet    To plot, contrive, or complot any ill    'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
I have done.    Yet, if my lord will marry,if you will, sir,    No remedy, but you will,give me the office    To choose you a queen:   she shall not be so young    As was your former; but she shall be such    As, walk'd your first queen's ghost,    it should take joy    To see her in your arms.
More pity that the eagle should be mewedWhile kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
What?
Hold, sir, or Ill throw your dagger o'er the house.
Marry, that with no man here he is offended,For were he, he had shown it in his looks.
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
[to FIRST MURDERER]  What shall we do?
[to ALONSO]  It is foul weather in us all, good sir,When you are cloudy.
Very brief, and to exceeding good senseless.
O dear father,Make not too rash a trial of him, forHes gentle and not fearful.
'Faith, some do, and some do not. But, mistress, ifI have bargained for the joint,
Go to, youre a dry fool. Ill no more of you. Besides, you grow dishonest.
'Tis very true.
Never in your life, I think, unless you see canary putme down.   Methinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian or an ordinary man has.   But I am a great eaterof beef, and I believe that does harm to my wit.
(  aside  ) Fire and brimstone!
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.
I mean, the Lord Protector.
Did Michael Cassio, when you wooed my lady,Know of your love?
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments hehas left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.
Not now, sweet Desdemona. Some other time.
And therefore do we what we are commanded.Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.Is he sure bound? look that you bind them fast.
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared tothat lord; he's ever sending: how shall I thankhim, thinkest thou? And what has he sent now?
That answer might have become Apemantus.
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Hark ye;The queen your mother rounds apace: we shallPresent our services to a fine new princeOne of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,If we would have you.
'Tis but fortune, all is fortune. Maria once told me she did affect me, and I have heard herself come thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion.   Besides, she uses me with a more exalted respect than anyone else that follows her. What should Ithink on t?
No, let me not.
I would I knew thy heart.
How    fares my gracious sir?    There are yet missing of your company    Some few odd lads that you remember not.
The emperor, in his rage, will doom her death.
Hes in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest.He shall taste of my bottle. If he have never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit.   If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will not take too much for him. He shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly.
Aye, sir.  [aside]  Ne'er a whit.
And have you mercy too! I never did    Offend you in my life,   never loved Cassio    But with such general warranty of heaven    As I might love. I never gave him token.
'Slight, will you make an ass o' me?
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds    That sees into the bottom of my grief?    O sweet my mother, cast me not away!    Delay this marriage for a month, a week.    Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed    In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Lord Lucius, and you princes of the Goths,    The Roman emperor greets you all by me;    And, for he understands you are in arms,    He craves a parley at your father's house,    Willing you to demand your hostages,    And they shall be immediately deliver'd.
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, tis enough. Where is my page?Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Is your man secret? Did you neer hear say,Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?    If it be so, out with it boldly, man;    Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
Worthy Camillo,What colour for my visitation shall IHold up before him?
Thou chidest me well:   proud Bolingbroke, I come    To change blows with thee for our day of doom.    This ague fit of fear is over-blown;    An easy task it is to win our own.    Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?    Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
Is not this strange?
That she was false to wedlock?
She is young and apt:Our own precedent passions do instruct usWhat levity's in youth.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
She is protectress of her honor too. May she give that?
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:    You are abused and by some putter-on    That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain,    I would land-damn him.   Be she honour-flaw'd,    I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven    The second and the third, nine, and some five;    If this prove true, they'll pay for't:    by mine honour,    I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see,    To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;    And I had rather glib myself than they    Should not produce fair issue.
Pourquoi,  my dear knight?
Sir, lend me your arm.
Prove that I cannot, take me home again,And prostitute me to the basest groomThat doth frequent your house.
[Aside]  I would I knew not why it should be slowed.Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Hark, hark! I hearThe strain of strutting chanticleerCry Cock-a-diddle-dow.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
O dear Diana,Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this?
Happy be you!All that you speak shows fair.
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do you think is his name?
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember wellThe very time Aumerle and you did talk.
Ay, Nurse, what of that? Both with an R.
A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.
I am none, by this good light.
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,    As I by friends am well advertisèd,    Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,    Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,    With many more confederates are in arms.
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.
The appellant in all duty greets your highness,And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
Is it true, think you?
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber. The day is broke. Be wary, look about.
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!    It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.    My back a t other side. Ah, my back, my back!    Beshrew your heart for sending me about,    To catch my death with jaunting up and down!
(  aside  ) Shall this fellow live?
Here comes the little villain.
I thank you, sir.
Thou dearest Perdita,    With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not    The mirth o' the feast.   Or I'll be thine, my fair,    Or not my father's. For I cannot be    Mine own, nor any thing to any, if    I be not thine.   To this I am most constant,    Though destiny say no.   Be merry, gentle;    Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing    That you behold the while.   Your guests are coming:    Lift up your countenance, as it were the day    Of celebration of that nuptial which    We two have sworn shall come.
This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing.
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood    Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants    Which labour'd after him to the mountain's top    Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,    Not one accompanying his declining foot.
Fairly offer'd.
I know not, madam.
Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand;We must needs dine together. Sir, your jewelHath suffer'd under praise.
Your lord does know my mind. I cannot love him.    Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,    Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth.    In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant;    And in dimension and the shape of nature    A gracious person.   But yet I cannot love him;    He might have took his answer long ago.
Many good morrows to my noble lord.
Not that I love you not.
Thy back, I prithee.
He is; and see, he brings the mayor along.
Theres no trust,    No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured,    All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.    Ah, wheres my man?Give me some aqua vitae.    These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.    Shame come to Romeo!
That you are well derived.
I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:    What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell;    But by bad courses may be understood    That their events can never fall out good.
No, by my life.    Privy to none of this.   How will this grieve you,    When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that    You thus have publish'd me!   Gentle my lord,    You scarce can right me throughly then to say    You did mistake.
[aside]    Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou    Performed, my Ariel. A grace it had, devouring.    Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated    In what thou hadst to say.   So with good life    And observation strange, my meaner ministers    Their several kinds have done.   My high charms work    And these mine enemies are all knit up    In their distractions.   They now are in my power,    And in these fits I leave them while I visit    Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned,    And his and mine loved darling.
Now, by heaven,    My blood begins my safer guides to rule,    And passion, having my best judgment collied,    Assays to lead the way.   If I once stir,    Or do but lift this arm, the best of you    Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know    How this foul rout began, who set it on,    And he that is approved in this offence,    Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth,    Shall lose me.   What, in a town of war    Yet wild, the peoples hearts brimful of fear,    To manage private and domestic quarrel?    In night, and on the court and guard of safety?    'Tis monstrous. Iago, who began t?
I thank your grace; the gift hath made me happy.    I now beseech you, for your daughter's sake,    To grant one boom that I shall ask of you.
Good aunt, stand up.
I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal.   I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool that has no more brain than a stone.   Look you now, hes out of his guard already. Unless you laughand minister occasion to him, he is gagged.   I protest Itake these wise men that crow so at these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.
I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow, gentle lady.
You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedicationTo the great lord.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,    My fair rose wither:   yet look up, behold,    That you in pity may dissolve to dew,    And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.    Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,    Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,    And not King Richard;   thou most beauteous inn,    Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,    When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
What is this? sport?
Petruchio, patience. I am Grumios pledge.    Why, this' a heavy chance twixt him and you,    Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.    And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale    Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
Hast thou not dropped from heaven?
[reads]  I will waylay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me
[to RICHARD]     Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife,    That never slept a quiet hour with thee,    Now fills thy sleep with perturbations.    Tomorrow, in the battle, think on me,    And fall thy edgeless sword: Despair and die!     [to RICHMOND]    Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep.    Dream of success and happy victory.    Thy adversarys wife doth pray for thee.
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.
[as LITIO]  For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.
Ay me, detested! How am I beguiled!
A thousand thousand!
[as LUCENTIO]  Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,By your firm promise. Gremio is outvied.
Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
Adieu, good neighbor.
I know her father, though I know not her,    And he knew my deceasèd father well.    I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her,    And therefore let me be thus bold with you    To give you over at this first encounter,    Unless you will accompany me thither.
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;    Compare dead happiness with living woe;    Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,    And he that slew them fouler than he is.  Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse.Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
Small joy have I in being Englands queen.
I never did thee harm.
Oh, twill be admirable!
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?Wherefore that box?
None that I more love than myself. You are a councilor.If you can command these elements to silence and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more.   Use your authority. If you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.   Cheerly, good hearts!   Out of our way, I say.
Nay, come, I prithee. Would thoudst be ruled by me!
Help, help, help!
By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts,These cates resist me, she but thought upon.
Dismiss me?
From heaven! alas, sir, I never came there God    forbid I should be so bold to press to heaven in my    young days.   Why, I am going with my pigeons to the    tribunal plebs, to take up a matter of brawl    betwixt my uncle and one of the emperial's men.
[within]  Ding-dong, bell.
[as LUCENTIO]  Call forth an officer.
[as VINCENTIO]  Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.
Ay.
But new struck nine.
Heres one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.
[Aside]    What's here?    A letter, that she loves the knight of Tyre!    'Tis the king's subtlety to have my life.    O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord,    A stranger and distressed gentleman,    That never aim'd so high to love your daughter,    But bent all offices to honour her.
The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you, and though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you.    You must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boist'rousexpedition.
Fear not my government.
What? what?
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes!
[to soldiers]    Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.    Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.    Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.    Ratcliffe.
Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward    Upon his party for the gain thereof;    And thereupon he sends you this good news,    That this same very day your enemies,    The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.
Be advised.
I ne'er heard yetThat any of these bolder vices wantedLess impudence to gainsay what they didThan to perform it first.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      Comfort, dear mother. God is    much displeased    That you take with unthankfulness, his doing.    In common worldly things, tis called ungrateful    With dull unwillingness to repay a debt    Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;    Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,    For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
Think, my lord? Alas, thou echost me    As if there were some monster in thy thought    Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something.    I heard thee say even now thou likst not that    When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?    And when I told thee he was of my counsel    Of my whole course of wooing, thou criedst Indeed?    And didst contract and purse thy brow together    As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain    Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me    Show me thy thought.
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.
I do suspect I have done some offenseThat seems disgracious in the citys eye,And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
Brother, Ill go and bring it thee.
Here is a thing too young for such a place,    Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I    Am like to do:   take in your arms this piece    Of your dead queen.
Worse and worse. She will not come!    O vile, intolerable, not to be endured!    Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,    Say I command her to come to me.
Here, at your lordship's service.
Your honour has through Ephesus pour'd forth    Your charity, and hundreds call themselves    Your creatures, who by you have been restored:    And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even    Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon    Such strong renown as time shall ne'er decay.
Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and bornNot three hours' travel from this very place.
I bleed, sir, but not killed.
Well demanded, wench.    My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,    So dear the love my people bore me,   nor set    A mark so bloody on the business, but    With colors fairer painted their foul ends.    In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,    Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared    A rotten carcass of a butt, not rigged,    Nor tackle, sail, nor mast.   The very rats    Instinctively had quit it. There they hoist us    To cry to th' sea that roared to us,   to sigh    To th' winds whose pity, sighing back again,    Did us but loving wrong.
Lead, monster; well follow. I would I could see this taborer. He lays it on.
I did, my lord.
Soft! who comes here?
Carry me to the jail?
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.
But not, as I am, royal.
I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in potting. Your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied HollanderDrink, ho!are nothing to your English.
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselvesWere he the veriest antic in the world.
Let me entreat you.
And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.    If heaven have any grievous plague in store    Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,    O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe    And then hurl down their indignation    On thee, the troubler of the poor worlds peace.    The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul.    Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livst,    And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends.    No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,    Unless it be while some tormenting dream    Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.    Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog,    Thou was sealed in they nativity    The slave of nature and the son of hell,    Thou slander of they heavy mother's womb,    Thou loathed issue of they father's loins,    Thou rag of honor, thou detested
Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
Oh, the more angel she,And you the blacker devil!
Who, he? I think the sun where he was bornDrew all such humors from him.
Prithee, tell me one thing first.
Then is he more beholding to you than I.
It is, my lord.
Your pardon, sir; for thisI'll blush you thanks.
I will not kiss thee; then the rot returnsTo thine own lips again.
Whither?
A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands, But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
To who?
Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate    Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature    Whom passion could not shake?   Whose solid virtue    The shot of accident nor dart of chance    Could neither graze nor pierce?
[as LUCENTIO]  'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
I will prove so, sir, to my power.
The watchdogs bark.
That they are out by lease.
Let us first see peace in Athens: there is no timeso miserable but a man may be true.
Which since you come too late of our intent,Yet witness what you hear we did intend.And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
Now, captain?
Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me,To be a torment to mine enemies?
You are welcome, sir.
Neighbors and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants    For to supply the places at the table,    You know there wants no junkets at the feast.    [To TRANIO]    Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegrooms place,    And let Bianca take her sisters room.
It is.
Marry, heaven forbid!
Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your lordship!
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.    Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.    I promised to enquire carefully    About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,    And by good fortune I have lighted well    On this young man,   for learning and behavior    Fit for her turn, well read in poetry    And other booksgood ones, I warrant ye.
You have of these pedlars, that have more in themthan you'ld think, sister.
[as LUCENTIO]  Of all mad matches never was the like.
Its dry, sir.
I shall.
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
No, sir, it is legs and thighs. Let me see the caper.  [SIRANDREW dances]  Ha, higher! Ha, ha, excellent!
Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.
Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,    When time is broke and no proportion kept!    So is it in the music of men's lives.    And here have I the daintiness of ear    To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string;    But for the concord of my state and time    Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.    I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;    For now hath time made me his numbering clock:    My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar    Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,    Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,    Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.    Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is    Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart,    Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans    Show minutes, times, and hours:   but my time    Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,    While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock.    This music mads me; let it sound no more;    For though it have helped madmen to their wits,    In me it seems it will make wise men mad.    Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!    For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard    Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.
I dare not say he lies anywhere.
With me? and welcome: happy day, my lords.
So, this was well ask'd,'twas so well perform'd.    Come, sir;    Here is a lady that wants breathing too:    And I have heard, you knights of Tyre    Are excellent in making ladies trip;    And that their measures are as excellent.
Why, Apemantus?
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,    Which mannerly devotion shows in this,    For saints have hands that pilgrims hands do touch,    And palm to palm is holy palmers kiss.
How! a king's daughter?And call'd Marina?
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business. I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.
'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep.Hell watch the horologe a double setIf drink rock not his cradle.
I think so too.
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,Though I should swear I saw t. 'Tis very much.Make her amends, she weeps.
Do thy worst.This deed of thine is no more worthy heavenThan thou wast worthy her.
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,More free than he is jealous.
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap,
I am no feed post, lady. Keep your purse.    My master, not myself, lacks recompense.    Love make his heart of flint that you shall love,    And let your fervor, like my masters, be    Placed in contempt. Farewell, fair cruelty.
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
Ay, what of that?
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
Stay, I will go with you.
She may, my lord, for
Come, Grey. Come, Vaughan. Let us all embrace.  [They embrace]  Farewell until we meet in heaven.
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moeballads; we'll buy the other things anon.
What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,A bachelor, a handsome stripling too.I wis, your grandam had a worser match.
No matter, sinceThey have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs.Will t please you taste of what is here?
[To KATHERINE]  Say as he says, or we shall never go.
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
'Tis done by me, and ends in Margaret.
Honour, health, and compassion to the senate!
True, noble prince.
There is example for t. The lady of the Strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe.
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
What, to perverseness?   You, uncivil lady,    To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars    My soul the faithfullst off'rings have breathed out    That e'er devotion tendered   what shall I do?
My lord,Is this the daughter of a king?
Can anything be made of this?
The hart.
O, attend, my daughter:    Princes in this should live like gods above,    Who freely give to every one that comes    To honour them:    And princes not doing so are like to gnats,    Which make a sound, but kill'd are wonder'd at.    Therefore to make his entrance more sweet,    Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.
My kind Antonio,    I can no other answer make but thanks,    And thanks, and ever thanks.   And oft good turns    Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay.    But were my worth as is my conscience, firm,    You should find better dealing.   Whats to do?    Shall we go see the relics of this town?
Get you to bed on th' instant, I will be returnedForthwith. Dismiss your attendant there, look t be done.
Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.
Then, as you are as virtuous as fair,    Resolve your angry father, if my tongue    Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe    To any syllable that made love to you.
If I name thee.I'll beat thee, but I should infect my hands.
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill    Feign'd Fortune to be throned: the base o' the mount    Is rank'd with all deserts, all kind of natures,    That labour on the bosom of this sphere    To propagate their states:   amongst them all,    Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd,    One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,    Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her;    Whose present grace to present slaves and servants    Translates his rivals.
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,    Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,    Which was not half so beautiful and kind;    You have added worth unto 't and lustre,    And entertain'd me with mine own device;    I am to thank you for 't.
Why, hes a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
(sings)      I called my love false love but what said he then?        Sing willow, willow, willow.      If I court more women youll couch with more men     So, get thee gone, good night. Mine eyes do itch,    Doth that bode weeping?
Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long am I, at the least.   But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress,   whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon feel, to thy coldcomfort, for being slow in thy hot office?
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.
Are your doors locked?
Why, go to bed, and sleep.
Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the mouth too.
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.
[as VINCENTIO]  Swear, if thou darest.
But few,And those but mean.
I am not valiant neither,    But ever puny whipster gets my sword.    But why should honor outlive honesty?    Let it go all.
How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale?
How! have they denied him?    Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?    And does he send to me? Three? hum!    It shows but little love or judgment in him:    Must I be his last refuge!   His friends, like    physicians,    Thrive, give him over: must I take the cure upon me?    Has much disgraced me in't; I'm angry at him,    That might have known my place: I see no sense for't,    But his occasion might have woo'd me first;    For, in my conscience, I was the first man    That e'er received gift from him:    And does he think so backwardly of me now,    That I'll requite its last? No:    So it may prove an argument of laughter    To the rest, and 'mongst lords I be thought a fool.    I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum,    Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;    I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,    And with their faint reply this answer join;    Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.
No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten piethat is, something stale and hoar ere it be spent.    [Sings]     An old hare hoar,    And an old hare hoar,    Is very good meat in Lent.    But a hare that is hoar    Is too much for a score    When it hoars ere it be spent.     [He speaks]   Romeo, will you come to your fathers? Well to dinner, thither.
O bitter consequence    That Edward still should live true noble prince!    Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.    Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead,    And I would have it suddenly performed.    What sayest thou now? Speak suddenly. Be brief.
At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent    But, so it is, it is not.   Was this taken    By any understanding pate but thine?    For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in    More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,    But of the finer natures? by some severals    Of head-piece extraordinary?   lower messes    Perchance are to this business purblind? say.
Is thy name Tyrrel?
He's but a country gentleman;Has done no more than other knights have done;Has broken a staff or so; so let it pass.
I prithee, hear me speak.
[Aside]   Heaven, that I had thy head! he has found    the meaning:    But I will gloze with him.      Young prince of Tyre,    Though by the tenor of our strict edict,    Your exposition misinterpreting,    We might proceed to cancel of your days;    Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree    As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise:    Forty days longer we do respite you;    If by which time our secret be undone,    This mercy shows we'll joy in such a son:    And until then your entertain shall be    As doth befit our honour and your worth.
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!
The tears have got small victory by that,For it was bad enough before their spite.
Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my friends.
Gods bread! It makes me mad.    Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,    Alone, in company, still my care hath been    To have her matched.  And having now provided  A gentleman of noble parentage,    Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly trained,    Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts,    Proportioned as ones thought would wish a man    And then to have a wretched puling fool,    A whining mammet, in her fortunes tender,    To answer Ill not wed, I cannot love,    I am too young, I pray you, pardon me.    But, an you will not wed, Ill pardon you.    Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.    Look to t, think on t, I do not use to jest.    Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart, advise.    An you be mine, Ill give you to my friend.    An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,    For, by my soul, Ill neer acknowledge thee,    Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.    Trust to t, bethink you. Ill not be forsworn.
Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when weencountered: I hope it is not so low with him ashe made it seem in the trial of his several friends.
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,Thy father was the Duke of Milan andA prince of power.
Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz.   For hes in the third degree of drink, hes drowned. Go look after him.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
What promise, chuck?
Dishonourable boy!    That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,    That it shall render vengeance and revenge    Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie    In earth as quiet as thy father's skull:    In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;    Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
That shall be by and by. I remember the story.
Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits faints.
By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o' nights. Your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.
First, heaven be the record to my speech!    In the devotion of a subject's love,    Tendering the precious safety of my prince,    And free from other misbegotten hate,    Come I appellant to this princely presence.    Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,    And mark my greeting well; for what I speak    My body shall make good upon this earth,    Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.    Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,    Too good to be so and too bad to live,    Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,    The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.    Once more, the more to aggravate the note,    With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat;    And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,    What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.
I'll not put    The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;    No more than were I painted I would wish    This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore    Desire to breed by me.   Here's flowers for you;    Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;    The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun    And with him rises weeping:   these are flowers    Of middle summer, and I think they are given    To men of middle age. You're very welcome.
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no    milliner can so fit his customers with gloves:   he    has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without    bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate    burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump    her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,    as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into    the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'Whoop, do me    no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with    'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'
Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:As much good stay with thee as go with me!
We must both give and take, my loving lord.
Then I know thee not:I never had honest man about me, I; allI kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.
And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee    For false forswearing and for murder too.    Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight    In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
Error i' the bill, sir, error i' the bill! I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and that Ill prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
My name is Mary, sir.
[To  GREMIO  and  HORTENSIO  ]  Gentlemen, that I may soon make good What I have saidBianca, get you in,And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
Well wait upon your lordship.
E'en so thou outrunnest grace. Fool, I will go withyou to Lord Timon's.
Amen, with all my heart.
The more degenerate and base art thou,    To make such means for her as thou hast done    And leave her on such slight conditions.    Now, by the honour of my ancestry,    I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,    And think thee worthy of an empress' love:    Know then, I here forget all former griefs,    Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,    Plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit,    To which I thus subscribe:   Sir Valentine,    Thou art a gentleman and well derived;    Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserved her.
'Tis figured in my tongue.
Come to what is important in t. I forgive you the praise.
What wouldst thou, fellow? And how camst thou hither?
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
Out o' th' moon, I do assure thee. I was the man i themoon when time was.
Tomorrow, then, we will attend your Grace, And so most joyfully we take our leave.
Why, would not you?
I bless the timeWhen my good falcon made her flight acrossThy father's ground.
Alas, poor rogue, I think indeed she loves me.
Oh, thinkst thou we shall ever meet again?
It boots thee not to be compassionate:    After our sentence plaining comes too late.
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.
I see you what you are, you are too proud.    But, if you were the devil, you are fair.    My lord and master loves you. Oh, such love    Could be but recompensed though you were crowned    The nonpareil of beauty.
A sail, a sail!
[Falls]  Oh, I am slain! If thou be merciful, Open the tomb. Lay me with Juliet.
Myself.
Nay, my lords,
'Ods lifelings, here he is!You broke my head for nothing, and that that I did, I was set on to do t by Sir Toby.
'Tis better as it is.
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?    Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,    When I, thy three hours wife, have mangled it?    But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?    That villain cousin would have killed my husband.    Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring.    Your tributary drops belong to woe,    Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.    My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,    And Tybalts dead, that would have slain my husband.    All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?    Some word there was, worser than Tybalts death,    That murdered me. I would forget it fain,    But oh, it presses to my memory,    Like damnèd guilty deeds to sinners minds.    Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banishèd.    That banishèd, that one word banishèd    Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalts death    Was woe enough, if it had ended there.    Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship    And needly will be ranked with other griefs,    Why followed not, when she said Tybalts dead,    Thy father or thy mother, nay, or both,    Which modern lamentations might have moved?    But with a rearward following Tybalts death,    Romeo is banishèd. To speak that word,    Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,    All slain, all dead. Romeo is banishèd.    There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,    In that words death. No words can that woe sound. Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,The citizens are mum, say not a word.
Theres none so foul and foolish thereunto,But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!    I have many enemies in Orsinos court,    Else would I very shortly see thee there.    But, come what may, I do adore thee so    That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Most heathenish and most gross!
Mine would, sir, were I human.
Feeling so the loss,Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper.   As I am a gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee for t.
O abominable!
Where be our men?
Hang, cur! Hang, you whoreson insolent noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.
The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard anew ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,if thou beest capable of things serious, thou mustknow the king is full of grief.
Here comes another troop to seek for you.
Is my lord angry?
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,    And tis my hope to end successfully.    My falcon now is sharp and passing empty,    And, till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged,    For then she never looks upon her lure.    Another way I have to man my haggard,    To make her come and know her keepers call.    That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites    That bate and beat and will not be obedient.    She ate no meat today, nor none shall eat.    Last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not.    As with the meat, some undeservèd fault    Ill find about the making of the bed,    And here Ill fling the pillow, there the bolster,    This way the coverlet, another way the sheets.    Ay, and amid this hurly I intend    That all is done in reverend care of her.    And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night,    And if she chance to nod Ill rail and brawl,    And with the clamor keep her still awake.    This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,    And thus Ill curb her mad and headstrong humor.    He that knows better how to tame a shrew,    Now let him speak; tis charity to show.
Was not my lordThe verier wag o' the two?
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
Oh, God i good een.
To the palace, an it like your worship.
Merry or sad shall't be?
Born in Verona, old Antonios son.My father dead, my fortune lives for me.And I do hope good days and long to see.
I pray thee, chide not. Her I love nowDoth grace for grace and love for love allow.The other did not so.
Whats the matter?
Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa is recovered.
And thou unfit for any place but hell.
By whom, Camillo?
Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,    And bring our emperor gently in thy hand,    Lucius our emperor; for well I know    The common voice do cry it shall be so.
O, by no means,    Honest Ventidius; you mistake my love:    I gave it freely ever; and there's none    Can truly say he gives, if he receives:    If our betters play at that game, we must not dare    To imitate them; faults that are rich are fair.
He wrought better that made the painter; and yethe's but a filthy piece of work.
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?Sorry am I that our goodwill effectsBiancas grief.
I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.    I thought my mother and my brother York    Would long ere this have met us on the way.    Fie, what a slug is Hastings that he comes not    To tell us whether they will come or no!
Lavinia, wert thou thus surprised, sweet girl,    Ravish'd and wrong'd, as Philomela was,    Forced in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods? See, see!    Ay, such a place there is, where we did hunt    O, had we never, never hunted there!    Pattern'd by that the poet here describes,    By nature made for murders and for rapes.
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee
Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,    Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:    I take my leave before I have begun,    For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.    Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.    Lo, this is all:nay, yet depart not so;    Though this be all, do not so quickly go;    I shall remember more.   Bid himah, what?    With all good speed at Plashy visit me.    Alack, and what shall good old York there see    But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,    Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?    And what hear there for welcome but my groans?    Therefore commend me; let him not come there,    To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.    Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:    The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
How say you to that, Malvolio?
What dangerous action, stood it next to death,    Would I not undergo for one calm look!    O, 'tis the curse in love, and still approved,    When women cannot love where they're beloved!
Ha! is not that his steward muffled so?He goes away in a cloud: call him, call him.
Will t please your Lordship drink a cup of sack?
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.
There is none worthy,    Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods    Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;    For has not the divine Apollo said,    Is't not the tenor of his oracle,    That King Leontes shall not have an heir    Till his lost child be found?   which that it shall,    Is all as monstrous to our human reason    As my Antigonus to break his grave    And come again to me; who, on my life,    Did perish with the infant.   'Tis your counsel    My lord should to the heavens be contrary,    Oppose against their wills.    [To LEONTES]   Care not for issue;    The crown will find an heir:   great Alexander    Left his to the worthiest; so his successor    Was like to be the best.
No, madam.
My temple stands in Ephesus: hie thee thither,    And do upon mine altar sacrifice.    There, when my maiden priests are met together,    Before the people all,    Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife:    To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter's, call    And give them repetition to the life.    Or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe;    Do it, and happy; by my silver bow!    Awake, and tell thy dream.
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the    door, you would never dance again after a tabour and    pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you:   he sings    several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he    utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's    ears grew to his tunes.
It stands your grace upon to do him right.
I will acquit you.
I warrant you, sir, let me alone.
Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is a devil, and no monster. I will leave him. I have no long spoon.
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:    Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,    And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;    Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,    But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;    Thy word is current with him for my death,    But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,And cry, O Clarence, my unhappy son?
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood    To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,  Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:And if we be, how dare thy joints forgetTo pay their awful duty to our presence?If we be not, show us the hand of GodThat hath dismissed us from our stewardship;For well we know, no hand of blood and boneCan gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.And though you think that all, as you have done,Have torn their souls by turning them from us,And we are barren and bereft of friends;Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,Is mustering in his clouds on our behalfArmies of pestilence; and they shall strikeYour children yet unborn and unbegot,That lift your vassal hands against my headAnd threat the glory of my precious crown.Tell Bolingbrokefor yond methinks he standsThat every stride he makes upon my land  Is dangerous treason:   he is come to open  The purple testament of bleeding war;But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sonsShall ill become the flower of England's face,Change the complexion of her maid-pale peaceTo scarlet indignation and bedewHer pastures' grass with faithful English blood.
Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain, And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,Warm and new killed.
By and by, I come.To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief. Tomorrow will I send.
Alas! For whose sake did I that ill deed?    For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.    He sends you not to murder me for this,    For in that sin he is as deep as I.    If God will be avengèd for this deed,    O, know you yet He doth it publicly!    Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm;    He needs no indirect or lawless course    To cut off those that have offended Him.
Mens eyes were made to look and let them gaze. I will not budge for no mans pleasure, I.
Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Whats she?
How? The Duke in council?    In this time of the night? Bring him away.    Mines not an idle cause.   The Duke himself,    Or any of my brothers of the state,    Cannot but feel this wrong as twere their own.    For if such actions may have passage free,    Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.
Hail, royal prince!
No longer stay.
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
I tell thee, Kate, twas burnt and dried away.    And I expressly am forbid to touch it,    For it engenders choler, planteth anger;    And better twere that both of us did fast,    Since of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,    Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.    Be patient, tomorrow t shall be mended,    And, for this night, well fast for company.    Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him;    And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare    To follow this fair corse unto her grave.    The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.    Move them no more by crossing their high will.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.    Then weep no more. Ill send to one in Mantua,    Where that same banished runagate doth live,    Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram    That he shall soon keep Tybalt company.    And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
What raiment will your Honor wear today?
Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for him.   I frown the while, and perchance wind up watch,or play with mysome rich jewel.   Toby approaches, curtsies there to me
If 'twill not serve,'tis not so base as you;For you serve knaves.
Commend me to him: I will send his ransom;    And being enfranchised, bid him come to me.    'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,    But to support him after. Fare you well.
I told her so, my lord,On your displeasure's peril and on mine,She should not visit you.
That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I    fear, the angle that plucks our son thither.   Thou    shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not    appearing what we are, have some question with the    shepherd;   from whose simplicity I think it not    uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither.    Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and    lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
I grant it, for thine own, whate'er it be.
He is drunk now. Where had he wine?
[aside]   Oh, you are well tuned now,But Ill set down the pegs that make this music,As honest as I am.
What would you with her, sir?
Your presence glads our days: honour we love;For who hates honour hates the gods above.
And so they are. Alas, that they are so, To die even when they to perfection grow!
Oh, help me there!
My lord, what is your will?
Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.
Come you to make confession to this Father?
Be you his eunuch, and your mute Ill be.When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must; for yourbride goes to that with shame which is her way to gowith warrant.
It is a reeling world indeed, my lord,And I believe will never stand uprightTill Richard wear the garland of the realm.
Do you dare our anger?'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect;We banish thee for ever.
Most wonderful!
Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,    A huswife that by selling her desires    Buys herself bread and clothes.   It is a creature    That dotes on Cassio, as tis the strumpets plague    To beguile many and be beguiled by one.    He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain    From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.
He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that they come from my niece, and that shes in love with him.
Thou art like the harpy,Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel's face,Seize with thine eagle's talons.
When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt bewelcome. I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus.
'Tis like a coffin, sir.
Of neither, girl:    For of joy, being altogether wanting,    It doth remember me the more of sorrow;    Or if of grief, being altogether had,    It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:    For what I have I need not to repeat;    And what I want it boots not to complain.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.
Where is the duke my father with his power?
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day.    First were we sad, fearing you would not come,    Now sadder that you come so unprovided.    Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,    An eyesore to our solemn festival.
Contend not, sir; for we are gentlemenThat neither in our hearts nor outward eyesEnvy the great nor do the low despise.
Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish adog's death. Answer not; I am gone.
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
Whither?
[returning the blow]  Why, theres for thee, and there, and there. Are all the people mad?
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,Upon this ground; and more it would content meTo have her honour true than your suspicion,Be blamed for't how you might.
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talkon when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. Whatailest thou, man?
And joy comes well in such a needy time.What are they, beseech your ladyship?
[aside]  O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
Find thou the means, and Ill find such a man.But now Ill tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
A thing for me? It is a common thing
O, he's the very soul of bounty!
Beshrew me, the knights in admirable fooling.
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,    I should be arguing still upon that doubt.    But let it rest.Now, Litio, to you.    Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,    That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.
What profane wretch art thou?
[sings and helps to attire PROSPERO]    Where the bee sucks, there suck I.    In a cowslips bell I lie.    There I couch when owls do cry.    On the bats back I do fly    After summer merrily.    Merrily, merrily shall I live now    Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
A daughter?    O heavens, that they were living both in Naples,    The king and queen there!   That they were, I wish    Myself were mudded in that oozy bed    Where my son lies.When did you lose your daughter?
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged. Good Sir Topas,do not think I am mad. They have laid me here in hideous darkness.
Help! Help, ho, help! O lady, speak again!Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!
Why, at her fathers.
[to TRINCULO]  Do I so? Take thou that.  [beatsTRINCULO]  As you like this, give me the lie another time.
Does she love him?
La, la, la, la! 'nothing doubting,' says he? Alas,    good lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not    keep so good a house.   Many a time and often I ha'    dined with him, and told him on't, and come again to    supper to him, of purpose to have him spend less,    and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning    by my coming.   Every man has his fault, and honesty    is his: I ha' told him on't, but I could ne'er get    him from't.
[to ALONSO]  I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand youIn this strange stare?
My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
She says it is a fair one.
Thou sayest true; they're too unwholesome, o'    conscience.   The poor Transylvanian is dead, that    lay with the little baggage.
Ay, he.
It is not lost, but what and if it were?
O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine,    That laid the sentence of dread banishment    On yon proud man, should take it off again    With words of sooth!   O that I were as great    As is my grief, or lesser than my name!    Or that I could forget what I have been,    Or not remember what I must be now!    Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,    Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
Let me ask you one thing:What do you think of my daughter, sir?
[as VINCENTIO]   Soft son.    Sir, by your leave, having come to Padua    To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio    Made me acquainted with a weighty cause    Of love between your daughter and himself.    And, for the good report I hear of you    And for the love he beareth to your daughter    And she to him, to stay him not too long,    I am content, in a good fathers care,    To have him matched.   And if you please to like    No worse than I, upon some agreement    Me shall you find ready and willing    With one consent to have her so bestowed,    For curious I cannot be with you,    Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else. Thou knowst not me.
What if he had said widower Aeneas too? Good Lord, how you take it!
Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so, For I have bills for money by exchangeFrom Florence, and must here deliver them.
By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men that give fools money get themselves a good reportafterfourteen years' purchase.
Thou sun, that comfort'st, burn! Speak, and    be hang'd:    For each true word, a blister! and each false    Be as cauterizing to the root o' the tongue,    Consuming it with speaking!
Why, whats a moveable?
Alack, why am I sent for to a king,    Before I have shook off the regal thoughts    Wherewith I reign'd?   I hardly yet have learn'd    To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:    Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me    To this submission.   Yet I well remember    The favours of these men: were they not mine?    Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me?    So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,    Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none.    God save the king! Will no man say amen?    Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.    God save the king! although I be not he;    And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.    To do what service am I sent for hither?
My brother and thy uncle, called Antonio    I pray thee, mark me (that a brother should    Be so perfidious!)   he whom next thyself    Of all the world I loved and to him put    The manage of my state, as at that time    Through all the signories it was the first,    And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed    In dignity, and for the liberal arts    Without a parallel.   Those being all my study,    The government I cast upon my brother    And to my state grew stranger, being transported    And rapt in secret studies.   Thy false uncle    Dost thou attend me?
Thy mother was a piece of virtue and    She said thou wast my daughter.   And thy father    Was Duke of Milan, and thou his only heir    And princess no worse issued.
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
Cursed be that heart that forced us to this shift!    Write thou good niece; and here display, at last,    What God will have discover'd for revenge;    Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,    That we may know the traitors and the truth!
I fear too early, for my mind misgives    Some consequence yet hanging in the stars    Shall bitterly begin his fearful date    With this nights revels, and expire the term    Of a despisèd life closed in my breast    By some vile forfeit of untimely death.    But he that hath the steerage of my course,    Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.
She says enough, yet shes a simple bawd    That cannot say as much.   This is a subtle whore,    A closet, lock and key, of villainous secrets.    And yet shell kneel and pray, I have seen her do t.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stayTo hear true shrift.Come, madam, lets away.
Even by my god I swear to thee I will.
Oh, help!
I know it is the moon.
O excellent motion! Fellows, lets be gone.
Pray you, chuck, come hither.
Is t possible?
Go to, go to.    You are a saucy boy. Is t so, indeed?    This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what.    You must contrary me. Marry, tis time.    Well said, my hearts!   You are a princox, go.    Be quiet, or   More light, more light!   For shame!    Ill make you quiet.   What, cheerly, my hearts!
O, gentlemen, see, see dead Henrys wounds    Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!    Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity,    For tis thy presence that exhales this blood    From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells.      Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural,    Provokes this deluge most unnatural.    O God, which this blood madst, revenge his death!    O earth, which this blood drinkst revenge his death!    Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead,    Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick,    As thou dost swallow up this good kings blood,    Which his hell-governed arm hath butcherèd!
[aside]  He will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
My lord.
To bear with patienceSuch griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself.
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast!
Stays here longer.
How! caught of me!    Make me not sighted like the basilisk:    I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better    By my regard, but kill'd none so.   Camillo,    As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto    Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns    Our gentry than our parents' noble names,    In whose success we are gentle,   I beseech you,    If you know aught which does behove my knowledge    Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not    In ignorant concealment.
Then, window, let day in and let life out.
As I intend to prosper and repent,    So thrive I in my dangerous affairs    Of hostile arms!   Myself myself confound,    Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours,    Day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest,    Be opposite all planets of good luck    To my proceedings if, with dear hearts love,    Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,    I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter.    In her consists my happiness and thine.    Without her follows to myself and thee,    Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,    Death, desolation, ruin and decay.    It cannot be avoided but by this;    It will not be avoided but by this.    Therefore, dear motherI must call you so    Be the attorney of my love to her:    Plead what I will be, not what I have been;    Not my deserts, but what I will deserve.    Urge the necessity and state of times,    And be not peevish found in great designs.
Youre welcome, sir, and he for your good sake.But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
My lord,
But if she cannot love you, sir?
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you    Here in Verona, ladies of esteem    Are made already mothers.   By my count,    I was your mother much upon these years    That you are now a maid.   Thus then in brief:    The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
Well met, my lord. I am glad to see your Honor.
O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye,Our empress' shame, and stately Rome's disgrace!She is deliver'd, lords; she is deliver'd.
Who shall begin?
He tells her somethingThat makes her blood look out: good sooth, she isThe queen of curds and cream.
Now, pretty one, how long have you been at this trade?
On your attendance, my lord, here.
Faith, Ill home tomorrow, Sir Toby. Your niece will not be seen.   Or if she be, its four to one shell none of me.   The count himself here hard by woos her.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,    Is the immediate jewel of their souls.    Who steals my purse steals trash. 'Tis something, nothing:    'Twas mine, tis his, and has been slave to thousands.    But he that filches from me my good name    Robs me of that which not enriches him    And makes me poor indeed.
O, then my best blood turn    To an infected jelly and my name    Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!    Turn then my freshest reputation to    A savour that may strike the dullest nostril    Where I arrive,   and my approach be shunn'd,    Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection    That e'er was heard or read!
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off youcould have been to him and then your blood had beenthe dearer by I know how much an ounce.
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower    And was embarked to cross to Burgundy,    And in my company my brother Gloucester,    Who from my cabin tempted me to walk    Upon the hatches.   Thence we looked toward England    And cited up a thousand fearful times,    During the wars of York and Lancaster    That had befall'n us.   As we paced along    Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,    Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling    Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard    Into the tumbling billows of the main.    O Lord, methought what pain it was to drown,    What dreadful noise of waters in my ears,    What sights of ugly death within my eyes.    Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks,    Ten thousand men that fishes gnawed upon,    Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,    Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,    All scattered in the bottom of the sea.    Some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes    Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept    as 'twere in scorn of eyes   reflecting gems,    That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep    And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.
Emilia, come.Be as your fancies teach you. Whate'er you be, I am obedient.
A howling monster, a drunken monster.
My lord, prince Pericles is fled.
[within]  Who knocks?
What if I had said I had seen him do you wrong?    Or heard him sayas knaves be such abroad,    Who having, by their own importunate suit,    Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,    Convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose    But they must blab
I see you do not mean to part with her, Or else you like not of my company.
[to PRINCE]  Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign.The weary way hath made you melancholy.
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
O Lord!
Know him? Ay.
Humbly I thank your grace.    Here is the man, this Moor,   whom now it seems,    Your special mandate for the state affairs    Hath hither brought.
My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
Who doth molest my contemplation?    Is it your trick to make me ope the door,    That so my sad decrees may fly away,    And all my study be to no effect?    You are deceived: for what I mean to do    See here in bloody lines I have set down;    And what is written shall be executed.
There, sir, stop.Let us not burden our remembrances withA heaviness thats gone.
O, whither?
Are you a woman?
O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil    That robb'd Andronicus of his good hand;    This is the pearl that pleased your empress' eye,    And here's the base fruit of his burning lust.    Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou convey    This growing image of thy fiend-like face?    Why dost not speak? what, deaf? not a word?    A halter, soldiers! hang him on this tree.    And by his side his fruit of bastardy.
No more, but that you read    These accusations and these grievous crimes    Committed by your person and your followers    Against the state and profit of this land;    That, by confessing them, the souls of men    May deem that you are worthily deposed.
The ship is here put in,    A Veronesa. Michael Cassio,    Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,    Is come on shore. The Moor himself at sea    And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
The more accursed thou, that still omitt'st it.
So please your grace, my ancient.    A man he is of honesty and trust.    To his conveyance I assign my wife,    With what else needful your good grace shall think    To be sent after me.
I thank you. How does lieutenant Cassio?
O, welcome, father!    Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,    Here to unfold   (though lately we intended    To keep in darkness what occasion now    Reveals before tis ripe)   what thou dost know    Hath newly passed between this youth and me.
The good King Simonides, do you call him.
My lord,'Tis done.
Peace, foolish woman.
And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.
My lord protector needs will have it so.
And must she die for this? O, let her live,    And Ill corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,    Slander myself as false to Edwards bed,    Throw over her the veil of infamy.    So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter,    I will confess she was not Edwards daughter.
To be consorted with the humorous night.Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Oh ho, oh ho! Would t had been done!Thou didst prevent me. I had peopled elseThis isle with Calibans.
O, but they say the tongues of dying men    Enforce attention like deep harmony:    Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,    For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.    He that no more must say is listen'd more    Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;    More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before:    The setting sun, and music at the close,    As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,    Writ in remembrance more than things long past:    Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,    My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
To vail the title, as her mother doth.
[Taking JULIETs hand]   If I profane with my unworthiesthand    This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:    My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand    To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Monster, I will kill this man. His daughter and I will be king and queensave our graces!and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo?
Bid her come hither. Go.
And far surmounts our labour to attain it.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
She did deceive her father, marrying you,And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,She loved them most.
Ill claim that promise at your Graces hands.
What says he?
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
I think shell sooner prove a soldier.Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtained,That is, her love, for that is all in all.
What, did they never whisper?
Good time of day unto my gracious lord.
[To LUCENTIO]   O, very well, I have perused the note.    Hark you, sir: Ill have them very fairly bound,    All books of love.   See that at any hand,    And see you read no other lectures to her.    You understand me. Over and beside    Signior Baptistas liberality,    Ill mend it with a largess.   Take your paper too.    And let me have them very well perfumd    For she is sweeter than perfume itself    To whom they go to.   What will you read to her?
[within]  What, ho! My lord, my lord!
Come, cordial and not poison, go with meTo Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
I will incontinently drown myself.
[To POLIXENES]  Sir, welcome:It is my father's will I should take on meThe hostess-ship o' the day.  [To CAMILLO]  You're welcome, sir.Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,For you there's rosemary and rue; these keepSeeming and savour all the winter long:Grace and remembrance be to you both,And welcome to our shearing!
A burning torch that's turned upside down;The word, 'Quod me alit, me extinguit.'
Tis but thy name that is my enemy.    Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.    Whats Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,    Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part    Belonging to a man.   O, be some other name!    Whats in a name? That which we call a rose    By any other word would smell as sweet.    So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,    Retain that dear perfection which he owes    Without that title.   Romeo, doff thy name,    And for that name, which is no part of thee    Take all myself.
I saw them speak together.
O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!    Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!    Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!    Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!    Would they make peace? terrible hell make war    Upon their spotted souls for this offence!
I drink the air before me, and returnOr ere your pulse twice beat.
Ay, and I thinkOne business does command us all; for mine Is money.
Where, good Mistress Mary?
Here, master. What cheer?
[aside]  Prospero my lord shall know what I have done.So, King, go safely on to seek thy son.
Cambio.
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him    Then forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept    A hellhound that doth hunt us all to death    That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,    To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood;    That excellent grand tyrant of the earth,    That reigns in gallèd eyes of weeping souls;    That foul defacer of Gods handiwork    Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.    O upright, just, and true-disposing God,    How do I thank thee that this carnal cur    Preys on the issue of his mothers body    And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
'Tis timeI should inform thee farther. Lend thy handAnd pluck my magic garment from me.
I am glad to see you.
And sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.
Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and speak tome. For I am Trinculobe not afeardthy good friend Trinculo.
Mark your divorce, young sir,    [Discovering himself]    Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base    To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir,    That thus affect'st a sheep-hook!   Thou old traitor,    I am sorry that by hanging thee I can    But shorten thy life one week.   And thou, fresh piece    Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know    The royal fool thou copest with,
What, will you not suffer me?   Nay, now I see    She is your treasure, she must have a husband,    I must dance barefoot on her wedding day    And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell.    Talk not to me. I will go sit and weep    Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Hes a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, tis stabbing.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child.    One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,    Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy    That thou expectst not, nor I looked not for.
O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame    To pay this debt of love but to a brother,    How will she love, when the rich golden shaft    Hath killed the flock of all affections else    That live in her, when liver, brain, and heart,    These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filled    Her sweet perfections with one self king!    Away before me to sweet beds of flowers.    Love thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
How close 'tis caulk'd and bitumed!Did the sea cast it up?
Here in your city; I now came from him:    I speak amazedly; and it becomes    My marvel and my message.   To your court    Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,    Of this fair couple, meets he on the way    The father of this seeming lady and    Her brother, having both their country quitted    With this young prince.
Which welcome we'll accept; feast here awhile,Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.
What, you mean my face?
All fortune to the good Simonides!
There is no womans sides    Can bide the beating of so strong a passion    As love doth give my heart.   No womans heart    So big, to hold so much. They lack retention.    Alas, their love may be called appetite,    No motion of the liver, but the palate,    That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt;    But mine is all as hungry as the sea,    And can digest as much.   Make no compare    Between that love a woman can bear me    And that I owe Olivia.
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.
Gentlemen,Why do you stir so early?
Tranio, lets go. One thing more rests, that thyself execute,  To make one among these wooers. If thou ask me why, Sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.
What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast,    Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.    Burn, house! sink, Athens! henceforth hated be    Of Timon man and all humanity!
Then list to me:    This follows, if you will not change your purpose    But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,    And there present yourself and your fair princess,    For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:    She shall be habited as it becomes    The partner of your bed.   Methinks I see    Leontes opening his free arms and weeping    His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness,    As 'twere i' the father's person;   kisses the hands    Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him    'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one    He chides to hell and bids the other grow    Faster than thought or time.
A good lenten answer. I can tell thee where that sayingwas born, of I fear no colors.
Call them again, sweet prince. Accept their suit.If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
[to FERDINAND]  Come on. Obey.Thy nerves are in their infancy againAnd have no vigor in them.
For what?
In his tongue.
'Tis a gentleman here   a plague o' these pickle herring!    How now, sot!
Kill men i' th' dark! Where be these bloody thieves?    How silent is this town!   Ho! murder! murder!    What may you be? Are you of good or evil?
A dry jest, sir.
Have I thought long to see this mornings face,And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Dorset, embrace him.Hastings, love Lord Marquess.
Ay, but I know
Lord governor, for so we hear you are,    Let not our ships and number of our men    Be like a beacon fired to amaze your eyes.    We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,    And seen the desolation of your streets:    Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,    But to relieve them of their heavy load;    And these our ships, you happily may think    Are like the Trojan horse was stuff'd within    With bloody veins, expecting overthrow,    Are stored with corn to make your needy bread,    And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.
It is a quarrel most unnatural To be revenged on him that loveth thee.
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, Ill answer him by law.Ill not budge an inch, boy. Let him come, and kindly.
Oh, they are our friends. But one cup. Ill drink for you.
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.    Thou saidstOh, it comes o'er my memory,    As doth the raven o'er the infectious house,    Boding to allhe had my handkerchief.
And, as we walk along, I dare be boldWith our discourse to make your grace to smile.What think you of this page, my lord?
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Nowart thou sociable. Now art thou Romeo.   Now art thou what thou artby art as well as by nature, for this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lollingup and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
We two, my lord,Will guard your person while you take your restAnd watch your safety.
Ay, with a twink.
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast    That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old.    'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.    Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
But for a satisfaction of my thought,No further harm.
'Tis true. Theres magic in the web of it.    A sibyl, that had numbered in the world    The sun to course two hundred compasses,    In her prophetic fury sewed the work.    The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk,    And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful    Conserved of maidens' hearts.
Ha?
Ay, boy, ready.
I may command where I adore. Why, she may command me.I serve her, she is my lady. Why, this is evident to any formal capacity. There is no obstruction in this. And the endwhat should that alphabetical position portend? If I could make that resemble something in meSoftly! M.O.A.I.
I am, and by my fancy: if my reasonWill thereto be obedient, I have reason;If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,Do bid it welcome.
Is t possible you will away tonight?
Tomorrow, sir. Best first go see your lodging.
Commend me to them,    And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,    Their fears of hostile strokes,   their aches, losses,    Their pangs of love, with other incident throes    That nature's fragile vessel doth sustain    In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them:    I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.
And may, but how? How satisfied, my lord? Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,Behold her topped?
That Thaisa am I, supposed deadAnd drown'd.
Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself.    If she and I be pleased, whats that to you?    'Tis bargained twixt us twain, being alone,    That she shall still be curst in company.    I tell you, tis incredible to believe    How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate!    She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss    She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,    That in a twink she won me to her love.    O, you are novices! 'Tis a world to see,    How tame, when men and women are alone,    A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.    Give me thy hand, Kate. I will unto Venice    To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding day.    Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests.    I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.
Gentlewoman, my lady calls.
My husband, then?
Of much less value is my companyThan your good words. But who comes here?
What, must our mouths be cold?
Theres many a beast then in a populous city,And many a civil monster.
I have not seen you long: how goes the world?
Are you in earnest, sir?  [Aside]  I smell the trick on't.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,    For how I firmly am resolved you know    That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter    Before I have a husband for the elder.  If either of you both love Katherina,Because I know you well and love you wellLeave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
Would poison were obedient and knew my mind!
How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?
I pray you do.
My lord, there are certain nobles of the senateNewly alighted, and come to visit you.
Even now, sir. On a moderate pace I have since arrived but hither.
By such despair I should accuse myself.
[aside]  That will not be in haste.
Marcus, we will.
Damn her, lewd minx! Oh, damn her, damn her!    Come, go with me apart.   I will withdraw    To furnish me with some swift means of death    For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
[as LITIO]  Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,You that durst swear that your mistress BiancaLoved none in the world so well as Lucentio.
Well, God give them wisdom that have it. And those thatare fools, let them use their talents.
My gentleman, Cesario?
I thinkYou'll turn a child again.
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,    It cannot countervail the exchange of joy    That one short minute gives me in her sight.    Do thou but close our hands with holy words,    Then love-devouring death do what he dare;    It is enough I may but call her mine.
A gentleman? What gentleman?
An I thought that, Id forswear it. Ill ride home tomorrow,Sir Toby.
My duty, madam, and most humble service.
Go, hang yourselves all! You are idle, shallow things. I am not of your element. You shall know more hereafter.
Comfort, good comfort!   We must to the king and show    our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your    daughter nor my sister; we are gone else.   Sir, I    will give you as much as this old man does when the    business is performed, and remain, as he says, your    pawn till it be brought you.
Here, noble lord. What is thy will with her?
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by    circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you    see, there is such unity in the proofs.   The mantle    of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it,    the letters of Antigonus found with it which they    know to be his character, the majesty of the    creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection    of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding,    and many other evidences proclaim her with all    certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see    the meeting of the two kings?
[as LITIO  , to  LUCENTIO]  You may go walk, and give me leave awhile.My lessons make no music in three parts.
Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments.Lay forth the gown.
The handkerchief!
Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a foolish knight
[as LUCENTIO]  What said the wench when he rose again?
Art thou gone so, love, lord? Ay, husband, friend,    I must hear from thee every day in the hour,    For in a minute there are many days.    Oh, by this count I shall be much in years    Ere I again behold my Romeo.
Your master will be dead ere you return;There's nothing can be minister'd to natureThat can recover him.  [TO PHILEMON]  Give this to the 'pothecary,And tell me how it works.
No, sir, the worse.
His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!    But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,    Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm;    We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,    And yet we strike not, but securely perish.
I rememberYou did supplant your brother Prospero.
It hath not appeared.
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Yes.
Who is thy lord?
What, are they dead?
I have nights cloak to hide me from their eyes,    And but thou love me, let them find me here.    My life were better ended by their hate    Than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.
I will be free from thee.
Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king    Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.    The means that heaven yields must be embraced,    And not neglected;   else, if heaven would,    And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,    The proffer'd means of succor and redress.
Do so, and after two daysI will discharge thee.
(  sings  )  Sir Toby, there you lie.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
And you, good sir. Pray, have you not a daughterCalled Katherina, fair and virtuous?
Woe to the land thats governed by a child.
The spirit torments me. Oh!
I have it not about me.
Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
No, madam, he does nothing but smile. Your ladyship were best to have some guard about you if he come, for sure the man is tainted in s wits.
Wherefore?
Say thou wilt course. Thy greyhounds are as swiftAs breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
And Ill still stay, to have thee still forget,Forgetting any other home but this.
I thank you, madam, that you tender her.Poor gentlewoman! My master wrongs her much.
So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again,    Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius:    All, sirrah, all:    I'll once more feast the rascals.
Neither.
My lord, we always have confess'd it.
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs and weeps.We took this mattock and this spade from him As he was coming from this churchyards side.
'Tis in grain, sir. 'Twill endure wind and weather.
And were the king on t, what would I do?
This gentleman, the Princes near ally,    My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt    In my behalf. My reputation stained    With Tybalts slander.   Tybalt, that an hour    Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,    Thy beauty hath made me effeminate    And in my temper softened valors steel!
Madman, thou errest.   I say, there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in their fog.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Poor Clarence did forsake his father Warwick,Ay, and forswore himselfwhich Jesu pardon!
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh    and blood has not offended the king; and so your    flesh and blood is not to be punished by him.   Show    those things you found about her, those secret    things, all but what she has with her:   this being    done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,    With tears augmenting the fresh mornings dew,    Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.    But all so soon as the all-cheering sun    Should in the farthest east begin to draw    The shady curtains from Auroras bed,    Away from light steals home my heavy son,    And private in his chamber pens himself,    Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,    And makes himself an artificial night.    Black and portentous must this humor prove    Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place tothe devil wrath. One unperfectness shows me another, tomake me frankly despise myself.
There lies that Tybalt.
Do, Paulina;For this affliction has a taste as sweetAs any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,There is an air comes from her: what fine chiselCould ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,For I will kiss her.
I was directed hither: men reportThou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.
Inter their bodies as becomes their births.    Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled    That in submission will return to us.    And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,    We will unite the white rose and the red.    Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,    That long have frowned upon their enmity.    What traitor hears me and says not Amen?    England hath long been mad and scarred herself.    The brother blindly shed the brothers blood.    The father rashly slaughtered his own son.    The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire.    All this divided York and Lancaster,    Divided, in their dire division.    O, now let Richmond and Elizabeth,    The true succeeders of each royal house,    By Gods fair ordinance conjoin together,    And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so,    Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,    With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days!    Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,    That would reduce these bloody days again,    And make poor England weep in streams of blood!    Let them not live to taste this lands increase,    That would with treason wound this fair lands peace.    Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again.    That she may long live here, God say amen.
You may have very fit occasion for t. He is now in some commerce with my lady and will by and by depart.
I pray you, be content, tis but his humor. The business of the state does him offence,And he does chide with you.
It doth so, holy sir, and theres my master,One that you love.
Here, my lord.
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,    As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.    O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,    Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,    And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.    Look how thy servants do attend on thee,    Each in his office ready at thy beck.    Wilt thou have music? Hark! Apollo plays,
A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!
Of thirty sail. And now they do re-stem    Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance    Their purposes toward Cyprus.   Signior Montano,    Your trusty and most valiant servitor,    With his free duty recommends you thus,    And prays you to believe him.
But thine doth fry.Skipper, stand back. 'Tis age that nourisheth.
Faith, nothing; but 'has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
Hark, they roar.
That's enough.
Who? Camillo?
I may not, verily.
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,    As doth the blushing discontented sun    From out the fiery portal of the east,    When he perceives the envious clouds are bent    To dim his glory and to stain the track    Of his bright passage to the occident.
Go, fellow, go. Return unto thy lord.    Bid him not fear the separated council.    His Honor and myself are at the one,    And at the other is my good friend Catesby,    Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us    Whereof I shall not have intelligence.    Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance.    And for his dreams, I wonder hes so simple    To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.    To fly the boar before the boar pursues    Were to incense the boar to follow us    And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.    Go, bid thy master rise and come to me,    And we will both together to the Tower,    Where he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
Prithee, no more.
The mighty dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.
I am their fathers mother. I will see them.
You taught me language, and my profit on t    Is I know how to curse.   The red plague rid you    For learning me your language!
Here, madam:  Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus,    Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
I know his gait, tis he.Villain, thou diest!
Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceiveLord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
Strike up the drum towards Athens! Farewell, Timon:If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.
The trumpet sounds. Be copious in exclaims.
Twenty-three days    They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells    The great Apollo suddenly will have    The truth of this appear.   Prepare you, lords;    Summon a session, that we may arraign    Our most disloyal lady,   for, as she hath    Been publicly accused, so shall she have    A just and open trial.   While she lives    My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,    And think upon my bidding.
I say it is the moon.
Well, go to. Very well.
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.
Touch not the boy; he is of royal blood.
It is requiredYou do awake your faith. Then all stand still;On: those that think it is unlawful businessI am about, let them depart.
My fan, Peter.
As you think meet. Most wretched queen!
We shall have a rare letter from him: but youll not deliver t?
Most villanously, like a pedant that keeps a school i' the church.   I have dogged him, like his murderer. He does obey every point of the letter that I dropped to betray him.   He does smile his face into more lines than is in the new map with the augmentation of the Indies.    You have not seen such a thing as tis. I can hardly forbear hurling things at him.   I know my lady will strike him. If she do, hell smile and take t for a great favor.
I should know that voice. It should beBut he is drowned, and these are devils. Oh, defend me!
To see his nobleness!    Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,    He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,    Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,    Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,    And downright languish'd.   Leave me solely: go,    See how he fares.    [Exit Servant]    Fie, fie! no thought of him:    The thought of my revenges that way    Recoil upon me:   in himself too mighty,    And in his parties, his alliance; let him be    Until a time may serve:   for present vengeance,    Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes    Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:    They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor    Shall she within my power.
I would most gladly know the issue of it.
How do you, gentlemen?
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing.They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
Yes, mine's three thousand crowns: what's yours?
How long hath he been there?
And twenty cagèd nightingales do sing:    Or wilt thou sleep?   Well have thee to a couch    Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed    On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.    Say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground.    Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapped,    Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.    Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar    Above the morning lark.   Or wilt thou hunt?    Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them    And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
But of all, the burstAnd the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my senseThat I was nothing.
The motions good indeed and be it so.Petruchio, I shall be your  ben venuto.
Little.
Ah, mocker, thats the dogs name. R is for theNo, I know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:    And yet salt water blinds them not so much    But they can see a sort of traitors here.    Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,    I find myself a traitor with the rest;    For I have given here my soul's consent    To undeck the pompous body of a king;    Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,    Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
Sir,This is the man that can, in aught you would,Resolve you.
Is the chair empty? Is the sword unswayed?    Is the king dead, the empire unpossessed?    What heir of York is there alive but we?    And who is Englands king but great Yorks heir?    Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?
[to OTHELLO]  What, in your own part, can you say to this?
All things in common nature should produce    Without sweat or endeavor.   Treason, felony,    Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,    Would I not have.   But nature should bring forth    Of its own kind all foison, all abundance,    To feed my innocent people.
Oh, villain!
[as CAMBIO]  All but the base.
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them, But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
(  disguising his voice   )  What ho, I say! Peace in this prison!
[to FERDINAND]     What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?    Your eldst acquaintance cannot be three hours.    Is she the goddess that hath severed us    And brought us thus together?
Thou wilt amend thy life?
Is't true? can't be?
Today, my lord, and for three months before, No interim, not a minutes vacancy,Both day and night did we keep company.
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. Come, be a man. Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind puppies! I have professed me thy friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness. I could never better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse.   Follow thou the wars,defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. I say, put money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue her love to the Moorput money in thy pursenor he his to her.   It was a violent commencement in her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestrationput but money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their willsfill thy purse with money.   The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida. She must change for youth. When she is sated with his body she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put money in thy purse.   If thou wiltneeds damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits and allthe tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her.   Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself! 'Tis clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be hanged in compassingthy joy than to be drowned and go without her.
What were I best to say? Her fathers brother    Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle?    Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?    Under what title shall I woo for thee,    That God, the law, my honor and her love    Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
This evening coming.
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your    beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office    than to be beadle.   But, master, I'll go draw up the    net.
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or Ill cry a match.
Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?
Thy grace shall have it.
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;    I needs must think it honesty.   Camillo,    Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may    Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or    The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides    In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath    To this my fair beloved:   therefore, I pray you,    As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,    When he shall miss me,as, in faith, I mean not    To see him any more,   cast your good counsels    Upon his passion;   let myself and fortune    Tug for the time to come.   This you may know    And so deliver, I am put to sea    With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;    And most opportune to our need I have    A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared    For this design.   What course I mean to hold    Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor    Concern me the reporting.
I pity you.
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,    which is in the keeping of Paulina,   a piece many    years in doing and now newly performed by that rare    Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself    eternity and could put breath into his work, would    beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her    ape:   he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that    they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of    answer: thither with all greediness of affection    are they gone, and there they intend to sup.
Prithee, no more. Thou dost talk nothing to me.
As willingly as e'er I came from school.
A sad tale's best for winter: I have oneOf sprites and goblins.
Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.
It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune,And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobsThat he would labor my delivery.
Know that our griefs are risen to the top,And now at length they overflow their banks.
The countess Richmond, good my lord of Derby,    To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.    Yet, Derby, notwithstanding shes your wife    And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured    I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
No, my good lord. My friends are in the north.
I pray you sir, go forthAnd give us truth who tis that is arrived.
Sad, lady! I could be sad. This does make some obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering, but whatof that?   If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true sonnet is, Please one, and please all.
Marry sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But,masters, heres money for you, and the general so likesyour music that he desires you, for loves sake, to make no more noise with it.
There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,    The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,    The County Paris, at Saint Peters Church,    Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
[seeing ALONSO and kneeling]  Though the seas threaten, they are merciful.I have cursed them without cause.
Villains, set down the corse or, by Saint Paul,Ill make a corse of him that disobeys.
No, not much moved. I do not think but Desdemonas honest.
Do not you hear a cry?
No noise, my lord; but needful conferenceAbout some gossips for your highness.
Why, my sweet lord?
Zounds, tis even now at my elbow, persuading me not tokill the duke.
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes tothe tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there'sscarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis inrequest, I can tell you.
You shall not write my praise.
Why, uncle, what's the matter?
How do you mean, removing of him?
Aside, aside; here comes Lord Timon.
Nay, Ill ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains.I will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.
O my good lord,    At many times I brought in my accounts,    Laid them before you; you would throw them off,    And say, you found them in mine honesty.    When, for some trifling present, you have bid me    Return so much, I have shook my head and wept;    Yea, 'gainst the authority of manners, pray'd you    To hold your hand more close:   I did endure    Not seldom, nor no slight cheques, when I have    Prompted you in the ebb of your estate    And your great flow of debts.   My loved lord,    Though you hear now, too lateyet now's a time    The greatest of your having lacks a half    To pay your present debts.
I know not; butHere is the regent, sir, of MytileneSpeaks nobly of her.
I warrant you.
And what said the gallant?
Like a bold champion, I assume the lists,    Nor ask advice of any other thought    But faithfulness and courage.    I am no viper, yet I feed    On mother's flesh which did me breed.    I sought a husband, in which labour    I found that kindness in a father:    He's father, son, and husband mild;    I mother, wife, and yet his child.    How they may be, and yet in two,    As you will live, resolve it you.    Sharp physic is the last: but, O you powers    That give heaven countless eyes to view men's acts,    Why cloud they not their sights perpetually,    If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?    Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still,    Were not this glorious casket stored with ill:    But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt    For he's no man on whom perfections wait    That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate.    You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings;    Who, finger'd to make man his lawful music,    Would draw heaven down, and all the gods, to hearken:    But being play'd upon before your time,    Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime.    Good sooth, I care not for you.
[as VINCENTIO]  Help, son! Help, Signior Baptista!
Yes, Caliban, her son.
No, madam, I do but read madness. An your ladyship willhave it as it ought to be, you must allow  vox.
Arise, I pray you, rise:We do not look for reverence, but to love,And harbourage for ourself, our ships, and men.
We have no reason to desire it,    Commended to our master, not to us:    Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire,    As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.
Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so.
But pearls are fair; and the old saying is,Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
Hic ibat    , as I told you before,    Simois    , I am Lucentio,    hic est    , son unto Vincentio of Pisa,      Sigeia tellus    , disguised thus to get your love,    Hic steterat    , and that Lucentio that comes a-wooing,    Priami    is my man Tranio,    regia    , bearing my port,    celsa senis,    that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in ourway!
Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee. Thy eyes are almost set in thy head.
I cry thee mercy.    There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.     [he gives money]     Hath any well-advisèd friend proclaimed    Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
And then?
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Why then, by God.
Whats he that now is going out of door?
Excellent well!
I have inly wept,    Or should have spoke ere this.   Look down, you gods,    And on this couple drop a blessèd crown,    For it is you that have chalked forth the way    Which brought us hither.
[Opens the door]  Welcome then.
He found it then,I never gave it him. Send for him hither,Let him confess a truth.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Can you do it?
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Here at the door. I pray you call them in.
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
I will confess to you that I love him.
Heres such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?
O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night To hear good counsel. Oh, what learning is!My lord, Ill tell my lady you will come.
No, Cassio is not killed.
Good even, Varro: what,You come for money?
Live, and love thy misery.
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread. I said a gown.
Pretty.What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
[to PRINCE]    My lord, will t please you pass along?    Myself and my good cousin Buckingham    Will to your mother, to entreat of her    To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
But believe you this, my lord, that, not long ago,    one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow    so many talents,   nay, urged extremely for't and    showed what necessity belonged to't, and yet was denied.
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; theking's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder isbroken out within this hour that ballad-makerscannot be able to express it.  [Enter a third gentleman]  Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he candeliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this newswhich is called true is so like an old tale, thatthe verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the kingfound his heir?
Nay then, I will not. You shall have the mustardOr else you get no beef of Grumio.
My lord?
Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,Out at the postern by the abbey-wall:I fear I am attended by some spies.
Sir, spare your threats:    The bug which you would fright me with I seek.    To me can life be no commodity:    The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,    I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,    But know not how it went.   My second joy    And first-fruits of my body, from his presence    I am barr'd, like one infectious.   My third comfort    Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast,    The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,    Haled out to murder:   myself on every post    Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred    The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs    To women of all fashion;   l   astly, hurried    Here to this place, i' the open air, before    I have got strength of limit.   Now, my liege,    Tell me what blessings I have here alive,    That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.    But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,    I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,    Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd    Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else    But what your jealousies awake, I tell you    'Tis rigor and not law.   Your honours all,    I do refer me to the oracle:    Apollo be my judge!
And he, and more    Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:    That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,    Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth    That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge    More than was ever man's, I would not prize them    Without her love;   for her employ them all;    Commend them and condemn them to her service    Or to their own perdition.
Weeping and wailing over Tybalts corse. Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
[reads]        Gamut    I am, the ground of all accord:     A re,    to plead Hortensios passion;     B mi,    Bianca, take him for thy lord,     C fa ut,    that loves with all affection;     D sol re,    one clef, two notes have I;     E la mi,    show pity, or I die.    Call you this gamut? Tut, I like it not.    Old fashions please me best.   I am not so nice    To change true rules for old inventions.
Why dost thou seek me out?
There is no other way. 'Tis she must do t,And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.    Lets see for means. O mischief, thou art swift    To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!    I do remember an apothecary    And hereabouts he dwellswhich late I noted    In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,    Culling of simples.   Meager were his looks,    Sharp misery had worn him to the bones,    And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,    An alligator stuffed, and other skins    Of ill-shaped fishes;   and about his shelves    A beggarly account of empty boxes,    Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,    Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,    Were thinly scattered to make up a show.    Noting this penury, to myself I said,    An if a man did need a poison now    Whose sale is present death in Mantua    Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.    Oh, this same thought did but forerun my need,    And this same needy man must sell it me.    As I remember, this should be the house.    Being holiday, the beggars shop is shut.    What, ho! Apothecary!
[as LUCENTIO]  But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
I pray you, upon what?
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you    To pardon me yet for a night or two,    Or if not so, until the sun be set.    For your physicians have expressly charged,    In peril to incur your former malady,    That I should yet absent me from your bed.    I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
What men of name are slain on either side?
How! gone!
Where were you bred?And how achieved you these endowments, whichYou make more rich to owe?
Ay, let her rot and perish and be damned tonight, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turned to stone. I strike it and it hurts my hand.   Oh, the world hath not asweeter creature, she might lie by an emperors side and command him tasks.
But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.If his occasion were not virtuous,I should not urge it half so faithfully.
What will you give us?
So, slave, hence!
I say, amen, Gonzalo.
Nor none that live, I hope.
Soft, he wakes.
Now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
Good morrow, neighbor Baptista.
Adieu, poor soul that takst thy leave of it.
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
Hold thy peace:    He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring    Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:    The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,    That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,    Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke,    I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
He seems to be a stranger; but his present isA wither'd branch, that's only green at top;The motto, 'In hac spe vivo.'
Master Malvolio?
Happily met, the happier for thy son.    And now by law as well as reverend age,    I may entitle thee my loving father.    The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,    Thy son by this hath married.   Wonder not    Nor be grieved. She is of good esteem,    Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth.    Beside, so qualified as may beseem    The spouse of any noble gentleman.    Let me embrace with old Vincentio,    And wander we to see thy honest son,    Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
Would we were all discharged!
Dear, look up:    Though Fortune, visible an enemy,    Should chase us with my father, power no jot    Hath she to change our loves.   Beseech you, sir,    Remember since you owed no more to time    Than I do now: with thought of such affections,    Step forth mine advocate; at your request    My father will grant precious things as trifles.
[aside]  I have seen them in the church together. God send'em good shipping! But who is here? Mine old masterVincentio! Now we are undone and brought to nothing.
Oh, villain that I am!
True, I talk of dreams,    Which are the children of an idle brain,    Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,    Which is as thin of substance as the air    And more inconstant than the wind, who woos    Even now the frozen bosom of the north,    And, being angered, puffs away from thence,    Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
God and our innocence defend and guard us!
By nothing, for this is no oath.    Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor;    Thy garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue;    Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory.    If something thou wouldst swear to be believed,    Swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.
We cannot but obey    The powers above us.   Could I rage and roar    As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end    Must be as 'tis.   My gentle babe Marina, whom,    For she was born at sea, I have named so, here    I charge your charity withal, leaving her    The infant of your care;   beseeching you    To give her princely training, that she may be    Manner'd as she is born.
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeos man,With instruments upon them fit to open These dead mens tombs.
O, let me look!    If he be none of mine, my sanctity    Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,    But curb it, spite of seeing.   O, my lord,    Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,    Like him you are: did you not name a tempest,    A birth, and death?
Oh,    If you but knew how you the purpose cherish    Whiles thus you mock it! How, in stripping it,    You more invest it!   Ebbing men indeed    Most often do so near the bottom run    By their own fear or sloth.
