Thou hast not half that power to do me harm    As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt!    As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed    I care not for thy sword, Ill make thee known    Though I lost twenty lives.   Help! Help, ho! Help!    The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!
I pray thee, mark me.    I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated    To closeness and the bettering of my mind    With that which, but by being so retired,    O'erprized all popular rate, in my false brother    Awaked an evil nature.   And my trust,    Like a good parent, did beget of him    A falsehood in its contrary as great    As my trust was, which had indeed no limit,    A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,    Not only with what my revenue yielded    But what my power might else exact,   like one    Who having into truth, by telling of it,    Made such a sinner of his memory    To credit his own lie   he did believe    He was indeed the duke, out o' th' substitution    And executing th' outward face of royalty,    With all prerogative:   Hence his ambition growing    Dost thou hear?
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,    After the last enchantment you did here,    A ring in chase of you.   So did I abuse    Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you:    Under your hard construction must I sit,    To force that on you, in a shameful cunning    Which you knew none of yours.   What might you think?    Have you not set mine honor at the stake,    And baited it with all the unmuzzled thoughts    That tyrannous heart can think?   To one of your receiving    Enough is shown.   A cypress, not a bosom,    Hides my heart. So, let me hear you speak.
At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer    What I desire to give, and much less take    What I shall die to want.   But this is trifling,    And all the more it seeks to hide itself    The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning,    And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!    I am your wife if you will marry me.    If not, Ill die your maid. To be your fellow    You may deny me, but Ill be your servant    Whether you will or no.
Yours, if you talk of tales. And so farewell.
[as CAMBIO]  Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Sister, content you in my discontent.    Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe.  My books and instruments shall be my company,On them to look and practice by myself.
Prithee, do not turn me about. My stomach is not constant.
Ay, my good lord.
Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.
Why, then, tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn.    On Tuesday noon, or night, or Wednesday morn.    I prithee name the time, but let it not    Exceed three days.   In faith, hes penitent,    And yet his trespass, in our common reason    (Save that, they say, the wars must make example    Out of her best)   is not, almost, a fault    T' incur a private check. When shall he come?    Tell me, Othello.   I wonder in my soul    What you would ask me that I should deny    Or stand so mamm'ring on. What?   Michael Cassio    That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,    When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,    Hath ta'en your part,   to have so much to do    To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much
[aside]  And supper too, although thou knowst it not.Come, will you go?
Thus, sir:    Although this lord of weak remembrancethis,    Who shall be of as little memory    When he is earthed   hath here almost persuade    (For hes a spirit of persuasion only,    Professes to persuade) the king his sons alive,    'Tis as impossible that hes undrowned    And he that sleeps here swims.
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst makeNo excuse current but to hang thyself.
Sir, he may live.    I saw him beat the surges under him,    And ride upon their backs.   He trod the water,    Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted    The surge most swoll'n that met him.     His bold head    'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared    Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke    To th' shore,   that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed,    As stooping to relieve him. I not doubt    He came alive to land.
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
Ay, madam. He desires to make atonement    Betwixt the duke of Gloucester and your brothers,    And betwixt them and my Lord Chamberlain,    And sent to warn them to his royal presence.
Down with the topmast! Yare, lower, lower! Bring her totry wi' th' main course.
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,    Till we can clear these ambiguities    And know their spring, their head, their true descent,    And then will I be general of your woes,    And lead you even to death.   Meantime forbear,    And let mischance be slave to patience.    Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
Till Pericles be dead,My heart can lend no succor to my head.
What will I do, thinkst thou?
To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.
Most strange!
Ill be your purse-bearer and leave youFor an hour.
[as LUCENTIO]  And I am one that love Bianca moreThan words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou, why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.   Thou wilt quarrel witha man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?   Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling.   Thouhast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep inthe sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter?   With another, fortying his new shoes with old ribbon? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!
Nay, I will win my wager better yet,And show more sign of her obedience,Her new-built virtue and obedience.
And ours, my lord.
'Tis no matter. Let it go. Theres few or none will entertain it.
Who shall hinder me?    I will despair, and be at enmity    With cozening hope:   he is a flatterer,    A parasite, a keeper back of death,    Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,    Which false hope lingers in extremity.
Soft you, a word or two before you go.    I have done the state some service, and they know t.    No more of that.   I pray you, in your letters,    When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,    Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate,    Nor set down aught in malice.   Then must you speak    Of one that loved not wisely, but too well.    Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,    Perplexed in the extreme.   Of one whose hand,    Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away    Richer than all his tribe.   Of one whose subdued eyes,    Albeit unused to the melting mood,    Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees    Their medicinal gum.   Set you down this,    And say besides that in Aleppo once,    Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk    Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,    I took by the throat the circumcisèd dog,    And smote him, thus.
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips:Not bodys death, but bodys banishment.
I warrant you, my lord.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave!   [To ROMEO]   Pray you, sir, a word.And as I told you, my young lady bid me inquire you out. What she bade me say, I will keep to myself.   But first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fools paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say.   For the gentlewoman is young, and therefore, if you should deal double with her, trulyit were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
What, thyself?
O, I am mock'd,And thou by some incensed god sent hitherTo make the world to laugh at me.
Oh, is that all? What will you give me now For the same handkerchief?
Thou hast. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.
So please my lord, I might not be admitted,    But from her handmaid do return this answer:    The element itself, till seven years' heat,    Shall not behold her face at ample view,    But like a cloistress, she will veiled walk    And water once a day her chamber round    With eye-offending brine   all this to season    A brothers dead love, which she would keep fresh    And lasting in her sad remembrance.
Alas Iago,    What shall I do to win my lord again?    Good friend, go to him. For, by this light of heaven,    I know not how I lost him.   Here I kneel:    If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love,    Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,    Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,    Delighted them, or any other form,    Or that I do not yet, and ever did,    And ever will   though he do shake me off    To beggarly divorcementlove him dearly,    Comfort forswear me!   Unkindness may do much,    And his unkindness may defeat my life,    But never taint my love.   I cannot say whore,    It does abhor me now I speak the word.    To do the act that might the addition earn    Not the worlds mass of vanity could make me.
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?    Where be thy tenants and thy followers?    Are they not now upon the western shore,    Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia,    Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.    We must not now displease him.
Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak with you.
When Proteus cannot love where he's beloved.    Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love,    For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith    Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths    Descended into perjury, to love me.    Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou'dst two;    And that's far worse than none;   better have none    Than plural faith which is too much by one:    Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons!A natural perspective, that is and is not!
Cesario is your servants name, fair princess.
Sweet lady, ho, ho.
I know thou dost; and, sweet Revenge, farewell.
The heavens,Through you, increase our wonder and set upYour fame forever.
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.    How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?    Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,    Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought    So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?
Come, come;    I love the king your father, and yourself,    With more than foreign heart.   We every day    Expect him here: when he shall come and find    Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,    He will repent the breadth of his great voyage;    Blame both my lord and me, that we have taken    No care to your best courses.   Go, I pray you,    Walk, and be cheerful once again; reserve    That excellent complexion, which did steal    The eyes of young and old.   Care not for me    I can go home alone.
No, indeed, did she not: here have I brought himback again.
Why then,    She's fled unto that peasant Valentine;    And Eglamour is in her company.    'Tis true; for Friar Laurence met them both,    As he in penance wander'd through the forest;    Him he knew well, and guess'd that it was she,    But, being mask'd, he was not sure of it;    Besides, she did intend confession    At Patrick's cell this even; and there she was not;    These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence.    Therefore, I pray you, stand not to discourse,    But mount you presently and meet with me    Upon the rising of the mountain-foot    That leads towards Mantua, whither they are fled:    Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
Have I a tongue to doom my brothers death,    And shall the tongue give pardon to a slave?    My brother killed no man; his fault was thought,    And yet his punishment was bitter death.    Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath,    Kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised?    Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?    Who told me how the poor soul did forsake    The mighty Warwick and did fight for me?    Who told me, in the field by Tewkesbury,    When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,    And said Dear brother, live, and be a king?    Who told me, when we both lay in the field    Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me    Even in his garments and did give himself,    All thin and naked, to the numb-cold night?    All this from my remembrance brutish wrath    Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you    Had so much grace to put it in my mind.    But when your carters or your waiting vassals    Have done a drunken slaughter and defaced    The precious image of our dear Redeemer,    You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon,    And I, unjustly too, must grant it you.     [STANLEY rises]     But for my brother, not a man would speak,    Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself    For him, poor soul.   The proudest of you all    Have been beholding to him in his life,    Yet none of you would once beg for his life.    O God, I fear Thy justice will take hold    On me and you, and mine and yours for this!    Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.    Ah, poor Clarence.
Basta,    content thee, for I have it full.    We have not yet been seen in any house,    Nor can we be distinguished by our faces    For man or master.   Then it follows thus:    Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,    Keep house and port and servants as I should.    I will some other be, some Florentine,    Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.    'Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once    Uncase thee. Take my colored hat and cloak.
[as LUCENTIO]  Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest wayTo the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
Whos that which rings the bell?Diablo, ho! The town will rise. Fie, Fie, lieutenant,Youll be ashamed for ever.
My lord,    Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes    Do all lie there:   it shall be so my care    To have you royally appointed as if    The scene you play were mine.   For instance, sir,    That you may know you shall not want, one word.
You have work'd for me; there's payment for you: hence!
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
To vouch this is no proof,    Without more wider and more overt test    Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods    Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
Tell thy story;    If thine consider'd prove the thousandth part    Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I    Have suffer'd like a girl:   yet thou dost look    Like Patience gazing on kings' graves, and smiling    Extremity out of act. What were thy friends?    How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin?    Recount, I do beseech thee: come, sit by me.
Madam, depart at pleasure; leave us here.
'Tis more by fortune, lady, than by merit.
Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord,Before I positively speak in this.I will resolve you herein presently.
Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost aman a doit.
O, good sir, I do.
Will t please your Honor taste of these conserves?
I once more take my leave.
[Aside]  I am almost afraid to stand aloneHere in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
No good at all that I can do for him;    Unless you call it good to pity him,    Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
Reputation, reputation, reputation! Oh, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, andwhat remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow    As I had title in thy noble husband.    I have bewept a worthy husbands death    And lived with looking on his images;    But now two mirrors of his princely semblance    Are cracked in pieces by malignant death,    And I, for comfort, have but one false glass    That grieves me when I see my shame in him.    Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother,    And hast the comfort of thy children left,    But death hath snatched my husband from mine arms    And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands,    Clarence and Edward.   O, what cause have I,    Thine being but a moiety of my moan,    To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!
Sir, I invite your highness and your train    To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest    For this one night,   whichpart of itIll waste    With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it    Go quick away: the story of my life    And the particular accidents gone by    Since I came to this isle.   And in the morn    Ill bring you to your ship and so to Naples,    Where I have hope to see the nuptial    Of these our dear-belovèd solemnized,    And thence retire me to my Milan, where    Every third thought shall be my grave.
See, see; what a man you are now!There is no other way but to tell the kingshe's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
Tomorrow, then, I judge a happy day.
No, not a whit. I find you passing gentle.    'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,    And now I find report a very liar.    For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,    But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers.    Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,    Nor bite the lip as angry wenches will,    Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk.    But thou with mildness entertainst thy wooers,    With gentle conference, soft and affable.    Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?    O slanderous world!   Kate like the hazel-twig     As hazel nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.    Oh, let me see thee walk! Thou dost not halt.
I should be wise, for honestys a foolAnd loses that it works for.
[Aside]  Villain and he be many miles asunder.  [To LADY CAPULET]  God pardon him! I do, with all my heart,And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him hereShalt with him hence.
Soft! I will go along.And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
A contract of true love to celebrate,And some donation freely to estateOn the blessed lovers.
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
[advancing]  How shall I murder him, Iago?
Fire and brimstone!
Thou wert but a lost monster.
Who comes with him?
Go fetch them hither to us presently.
So it is.
Dost thou prate, rogue?  [strikes him]
Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or I'llfetch thee with a wanion.
I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordshipthat I returned you an empty messenger.
Let him approach. Call in my gentlewoman.
O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.  [To CAMILLO]  Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.He's simple and tells much.  [To FLORIZEL]   How now, fair shepherd!    Your heart is full of something that does take    Your mind from feasting.   Sooth, when I was young    And handed love as you do, I was wont    To load my she with knacks:   I would have ransack'd    The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it    To her acceptance; you have let him go    And nothing marted with him.   If your lass    Interpretation should abuse and call this    Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited    For a reply, at least if you make a care    Of happy holding her.
My legs do better understand me, sir, than I understandwhat you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
Sir?
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak,    And speak I will. I am no child, no babe.    Your betters have endured me say my mind,    And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.    My tongue will tell the anger of my heart    Or else my heart, concealing it, will break,    And, rather than it shall, I will be free    Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
Go to, then.
My gracious uncle
On Wednesday next we solemnly set downOur coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
Hold your hands,    Both you of my inclining and the rest.    Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it    Without a prompter. Whither will you that I go    To answer this your charge?
None rare, my lord.
Ay, boy.
Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.
Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.
Leave your prating: since these good men arepleased, let them come in; but quickly now.
Canst not read?
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,Pisa renownèd for grave citizens.
If to either, thou dost ill.
Come, come, we fear the worst. All will be well.
Where's the lord governor?
Do you know this house to be a place of such resort,and will come into 't? I hear say you are ofhonourable parts, and are the governor of this place.
He kills her in her own humor.
Ill give thee armor to keep off that word Adversitys sweet milk, philosophyTo comfort thee though thou art banishèd.
Welcome home, Grumio.
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here    I snatched one half out of the jaws of death,    Relieved him with such sanctity of love,    And to his image, which methought did promise    Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
O Juliet, I already know thy grief.    It strains me past the compass of my wits.    I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,    On Thursday next be married to this county.
Princes and noble lords,    What answer shall I make to this base man?    Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,    On equal terms to give him chastisement?    Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd    With the attainder of his slanderous lips.    There is my gage, the manual seal of death,    That marks thee out for hell:   I say, thou liest,    And will maintain what thou hast said is false    In thy heart-blood, though being all too base    To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
Patience, good sir; do not assist the storm.    Here's all that is left living of your queen,    A little daughter: for the sake of it,    Be manly, and take comfort.
What wouldst thou have with me?
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester. You envy my advancement, and my friends'.God grant we never may have need of you.
[aside to  LUCENTIO  ]  Well said, master. Mum, and gaze your fill.
Come now, your one thing.
Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
Nobody. I myself. Farewell.Commend me to my kind lord. Oh, farewell!
From Isidore;He humbly prays your speedy payment.
My lord, 'tis rated    As those which sell would give: but you well know,    Things of like value differing in the owners    Are prized by their masters:   believe't, dear lord,    You mend the jewel by the wearing it.
O Harrys wife, triumph not in my woes! God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now    Has these poor men in question.   Never saw I    Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;    Forswear themselves as often as they speak:    Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them    With divers deaths in death.
'Faith, there's no way to be rid on't but by theway to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
What would my potent master? Here I am.
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.
O! We are spoiled and yonder he is! Deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.
Any thing, my lord,That my ability may undergoAnd nobleness impose: at least thus much:I'll pawn the little blood which I have leftTo save the innocent: any thing possible.
Were I chief lord of all this spacious world,    I'ld give it to undo the deed.   O lady,    Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess    To equal any single crown o' the earth    I' the justice of compare!   O villain Leonine!    Whom thou hast poison'd too:    If thou hadst drunk to him, 't had been a kindness    Becoming well thy fact:   what canst thou say    When noble Pericles shall demand his child?
Thats one of them.
It is your grace's pleasure to commend;Not my desert.
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
I am the greatest, able to do least,    Yet most suspected, as the time and place    Doth make against me, of this direful murder.    And here I stand, both to impeach and purge,    Myself condemnèd and myself excused.
What is your pleasure, madam? How is t with you?
[as LITIO]   But, wrangling pedant, this is    The patroness of heavenly harmony.    Then give me leave to have prerogative,    And when in music we have spent an hour,    Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
What, Grumio!
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed.But be thou armed for some unhappy words.
Well, my dread lordso must I call you now.
I do beseech your grace to pardon me:    It is a matter of small consequence,    Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
Naught to do with Mistress Shore? I tell thee, fellow,He that doth naught with her, excepting one, Were best he do it secretly, alone.
We but offend him. Strike!
Many years of happy days befalMy gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
I am not mad; I know thee well enough:    Witness this wretched stump, witness these crimson lines;    Witness these trenches made by grief and care,    Witness the tiring day and heavy night;    Witness all sorrow, that I know thee well    For our proud empress, mighty Tamora:    Is not thy coming for my other hand?
I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.    Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours:    Jove send her    A better guiding spirit!   What needs these hands?    You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,    Will never do him good, not one of you.  So, so: farewell; we are gone.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.  [He gives BALTHASAR money]  Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
Those are the raisèd father and his friends.You were best go in.
These are not natural events. They strengthenFrom strange to stranger.  [to BOATSWAIN]  Say, how came you hither?
Come, come, youre mocking. We will have no telling.
But you, my knight and guest;To whom this wreath of victory I give,And crown you king of this day's happiness.
[t    o  FABIAN  and  MARIA   ]   Go to, go to! Peace, peace. We must deal gently with him. Let me alone.   How do you, Malvolio? How is t with you? What, man, defy the devil!Consider, hes an enemy to mankind.
Rise, prithee, rise.    Sit down: thou art no flatterer:    I thank thee for it;   and heaven forbid    That kings should let their ears hear their    faults hid!    Fit counsellor and servant for a prince,    Who by thy wisdom makest a prince thy servant,    What wouldst thou have me do?
He something seems unsettled.
O, 'tis a verse in Horace; I know it well:I read it in the grammar long ago.
Why then I think Cassios an honest man.
That were some love but little policy.
I said, my lord, if you did know my parentage,You would not do me violence.
He that is yours, sweet lady.
And yet I come not well.
Art thou proud yet?
Say I will love her everlastingly.
I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. I am theyoungest of that name, for fault of a worse.
Oh, heaven, how got she out? Oh, treason of the blood!    Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds    By what you see them act.   Is there not charms    By which the property of youth and maidhood    May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,    Of some such thing?
I was provokèd by her sland'rous tongue,That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
O Dorset, speak not to me. Get thee gone.    Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels.    Thy mothers name is ominous to children.    If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas,    And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.    Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse,    Lest thou increase the number of the dead    And make me die the thrall of Margarets curse,    Nor mother, wife, nor Englands counted queen.
Tell me your mind.
Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
Did he confess it?
Master, you looked so longly on the maid, Perhaps you marked not whats the pith of all.
Are you a comedian?
Oh, woe the day!
No, friend, cannot you beg? Here's them in ourcountry Greece gets more with begging than we can dowith working.
At my request he would not.Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokestTo better purpose.
[as CAMBIO]  Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
By providence divine.    Some food we had and some fresh water that    A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,    Out of his charity, who being then appointed    Master of this design, did give us,   with    Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries,    Which since have steaded much.   So, of his gentleness,    Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me    From mine own library with volumes that    I prize above my dukedom.
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.
Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,Which he counts but a trifle.
A living drollery. Now I will believe    That there are unicorns,   that in Arabia    There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix    At this hour reigning there.
Ay, twas he that told me on her first. An honest man he is, and hates the slimeThat sticks on filthy deeds.
At the good queen's entreaty.
I have not deserved this.
Come, Sir Andrew, theres no remedy. The gentleman will, for his honors sake, have one bout with you.   He cannot by the duello avoid it.   But he has promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on, to t.
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
Whither?
Why should we in the compass of a pale    Keep law and form and due proportion,    Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,    When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,    Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,    Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd,    Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs    Swarming with caterpillars?
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every todyields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundredshorn. what comes the wool to?
Well, gentlemen,    I am thus resolved. On Sunday next, you know    My daughter Katherina is to be married.    [To  TRANIO  as  LUCENTIO  ]    Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca    Be bride to you, if you make this assurance.    If not, to Signior Gremio.    And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
In like manner was I in debt to my importunate    business, but he would not hear my excuse.   I am    sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my    provision was out.
Thou wrongst it more than tears with that report.
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool,    And to do that well craves a kind of wit.    He must observe their mood on whom he jests,    The quality of persons, and the time,    And, like the haggard, check at every feather    That comes before his eye.   This is a practise    As full of labor as a wise mans art,    For folly that he wisely shows is fit.    But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
You, my lords,    Look on her, mark her well; be but about    To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and    The justice of your hearts will thereto add    'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'    Praise her but for this her without-door form,    Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight    The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands    That calumny doth useO, I am out    That mercy does, for calumny will sear    Virtue itself:   these shrugs, these hums and ha's,    When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between    Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,    From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,    She's an adulteress.
[to SEBASTIAN]  The visitor will not give him o'er so.
ThatShall be when your first queen's again in breath;Never till then.
Who can be other in this royal presence?
Good morrow.
Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
Think what you will, we seize into our handsHis plate, his goods, his money and his lands.
Of Messaline. Sebastian was my father;    Such a Sebastian was my brother too,    So went he suited to his watery tomb  .  If spirits can assume both form and suit    You come to fright us.
I am hurt.A plague o both your houses! I am sped.Is he gone and hath nothing?
[sings drunkenly]    Farewell, master! Farewell, farewell.
[sitting down beside her]     Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave    As thou canst yield a melancholy seat,    Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.    O, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
[to FERDINAND]  Come, follow.  [to MIRANDA]  Speak not for him.
[Aside]   How from the finny subject of the sea    These fishers tell the infirmities of men;    And from their watery empire recollect    All that may men approve or men detect!    Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen.
Why do you speak so faintly?Are you not well?
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind    Transform'd and weaken'd?   hath Bolingbroke deposed    Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?    The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,    And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage    To be o'erpower'd;   and wilt thou, pupil-like,    Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,    And fawn on rage with base humility,    Which art a lion and a king of beasts?
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. Whathis happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but Ihave missingly noted, he is of late much retiredfrom court and is less frequent to his princelyexercises than formerly he hath appeared.
Even all I have ay, and myself and all    Will I withal endow a child of thine;    So in the Lethe of thy angry soul    Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs    Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
Will you, indeed?
On what I hate I feed not.
I know it well.What must I call her?
So is theirs and ours.
O good Sir Toby, hold! Here come the officers.
I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter andthe Moor are now making the beast with two backs.
Praised!
It cannot be.
Good morrow, cousin.
Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court:We will afflict the emperor in his pride.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!
O, pray, let's see't: for the Lord Timon, sir?
This was well done, my bird.    Thy shape invisible retain thou still.    The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither    For stale to catch these thieves.
We see the very wreck that we must suffer;    And unavoided is the danger now,    For suffering so the causes of our wreck.
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.
A most courteous exposition.
You'll take it ill.
Thats most certain.
He pours it out; Plutus, the god of gold,    Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays    Sevenfold above itself;   no gift to him,    But breeds the giver a return exceeding    All use of quittance.
Away! what art thou?
Think on thy sins.
I know not neither, I found it in my chamber.    I like the work well.   Ere it be demanded,    As like enough it will, I would have it copied.    Take it and do t, and leave me for this time.
Knock at the gate? O heavens! Spake you not these wordsplain: Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly? And come you now with knocking at the gate?
Why, that is nothing.   For I tell you, father,    I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;    And where two raging fires meet together,    They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.    Though little fire grows great with little wind,    Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all.    So I to her and so she yields to me,    For I am rough and woo not like a babe.
[From within]  Ho, daughter, are you up?
A reason mighty, strong, and effectual;    A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant,    For me, most wretched, to perform the like.    Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee;
Pray you then,Conduct me to the queen.
It is the very error of the moon,She comes more nearer earth than she was wont And makes men mad.
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears.I like you lads. About your business straight.Go, go, dispatch.
Beshrew him for t!How comes this trick upon him?
That will I.Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.
She that I spake of, our great captains captain,    Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,    Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts    A se'nnights speed.   Great Jove, Othello guard,    And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,    That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,    Make loves quick pants in Desdemonas arms,    Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits    And bring all Cyprus comfort!
But, Othello, speak.    Did you by indirect and forcèd courses    Subdue and poison this young maids affections?    Or came it by request and such fair question    As soul to soul affordeth?
Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio the lunatic.
Oh, a cherubim    Thou wast that did preserve me.   Thou didst smile    Infusèd with a fortitude from heaven,    When I have decked the sea with drops full salt,    Under my burthen groaned;   which raised in me    An undergoing stomach to bear up    Against what should ensue.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
[Aside]  True; from a gentleman to a fool.
Now is my turn to speak. Behold this child:
[as VINCENTIO]  Hes within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.
Each day still better other's happiness   ;    Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,    Add an immortal title to your crown!
Good madam,
Why, thats my dainty Ariel. I shall miss thee,    But yet thou shalt have freedom.So, so, so.    To the kings ship, invisible as thou art.    There shalt thou find the mariners asleep    Under the hatches.   The Master and the Boatswain    Being awake, enforce them to this place,    And presently, I prithee.
I think you haveAs little skill to fear as I have purposeTo put you to't. But come; our dance, I pray:Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,That never mean to part.
Go you, sir, to the senators    Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have    Deserved this hearing   bid 'em send o' the instant    A thousand talents to me.
My lord?
To do this is within the compass of mans wit, and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
You mistake, sir. I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me. My remembrance is very free and clear from any imageof offense done to any man.
As I hope    For quiet days, fair issue, and long life,    With such love as tis now,   the murkiest den,    The most opportune place, the strongst suggestion,    Our worser genius can shall never melt    Mine honor into lust to take away    The edge of that days celebration    When I shall think, or Phoebus' steeds are foundered,    Or night kept chained below.
Was never mother had so dear a loss.    Alas, I am the mother of these griefs.    Their woes are parceled; mine are general.    She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;    I for a Clarence weep; so doth not she.    These babes for Clarence weep and so do I;    I for an Edward weep; so do not they.    Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed,    Pour all your tears. I am your sorrows nurse,    And I will pamper it with lamentations.
[to RICHARD]  Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
He dies.
Five thousand drops pays that.What yours?and yours?
The little casket bring me hither.
Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen,    We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves    Will in that kingdom spend our following days:    Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.    Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay    To hear the rest untold: sir, lead's the way.
O, I have passed a miserable night,    So full of ugly dreams, of ugly sights,    That, as I am a Christian faithful man,    I would not spend another such a night    Though twere to buy a world of happy days,    So full of dismal terror was the time.
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-laceand a pair of sweet gloves.
Oh, who hath done this deed?
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fearnot, man; here's no harm intended to thee.
I am thus bold to put your Grace in mindOf what you promised me.
I care not:    It is an heretic that makes the fire,    Not she which burns in't.   I'll not call you tyrant;    But this most cruel usage of your queen,    Not able to produce more accusation    Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours    Of tyranny   and will ignoble make you,    Yea, scandalous to the world.
You may go to the devils dam! Your gifts are so good heres none will hold you.   Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together and fast it fairly out.   Our cakes dough on both sides. Farewell.   Yet for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.
No, monster, not I.
I will be brief, for my short date of breath    Is not so long as is a tedious tale.    Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,    And she, there dead, that Romeos faithful wife.    I married them, and their stoln marriage day    Was Tybalts doomsday, whose untimely death    Banished the new-made bridegroom from the city    For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.    You, to remove that siege of grief from her,    Betrothed and would have married her perforce    To County Paris. Then comes she to me,    And with wild looks bid me devise some mean    To rid her from this second marriage,    Or in my cell there would she kill herself.    Then gave I her, so tutored by my art,    A sleeping potion, which so took effect    As I intended, for it wrought on her    The form of death.    Meantime I writ to Romeo,    That he should hither come as this dire night,    To help to take her from her borrowed grave,    Being the time the potions force should cease.    But he which bore my letter, Friar John,    Was stayed by accident, and yesternight    Returned my letter back. Then all alone    At the prefixèd hour of her waking    Came I to take her from her kindreds vault,    Meaning to keep her closely at my cell    Till I conveniently could send to Romeo,    But when I came, some minute ere the time    Of her awakening, here untimely lay    The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.    She wakes, and I entreated her come forth,    And bear this work of heaven with patience.    But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,    And she, too desperate, would not go with me,    But, as it seems, did violence on herself.    All this I know, and to the marriage    Her Nurse is privy.   And if aught in this    Miscarried by my fault, let my old life    Be sacrificed some hour before his time    Unto the rigor of severest law.
By what? By any other house or person?    Of anything the image tell me that    Hath kept with thy remembrance.
[as LUCENTIO]  But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now tis plotted!
Feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady Olivias father took much delight in. He is about the house.
How now? Moody?What is t thou canst demand?
What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.
I shall never begin if I hold my peace.
Still so constant, lord.
A woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis I.Speak with me, pity me, open the door.A beggar begs that never begg'd before.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king,    Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster,    Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood,    Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost    To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,    Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,    Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds.    Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life    I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.    O, cursèd be the hand that made these holes;    Cursèd the heart that had the heart to do it;    Cursèd the blood that let this blood from hence.    More direful hap betide that hated wretch    That makes us wretched by the death of thee    Than I can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads,    Or any creeping venomed thing that lives.    If ever he have child, abortive be it,    Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,    Whose ugly and unnatural aspect    May fright the hopeful mother at the view,    And that be heir to his unhappiness.    If ever he have wife, let her be made    More miserable by the death of him    Than I am made by my poor lord and thee.    Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load,    Taken from Pauls to be interrèd there.
Nay, he will answer the letters master, how he dares, being dared.
Why, this is the world's soul; and just of the    same piece    Is every flatterer's spirit.   Who can call him    His friend that dips in the same dish?   for, in    My knowing, Timon has been this lord's father,    And kept his credit with his purse,    Supported his estate;   nay, Timon's money    Has paid his men their wages: he ne'er drinks,    But Timon's silver treads upon his lip;    And yetO, see the monstrousness of man    When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!    He does deny him, in respect of his,    What charitable men afford to beggars.
What if it come to thee again?
My affectionsAre then most humble. I have no ambitionTo see a goodlier man.
Why will you mew her up,Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hellAnd make her bear the penance of her tongue?
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs, And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Offended us you have not, but the king.
How now, Grumio?
But me more good, to see so great a lordBasely insinuate and send us gifts.
Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass.   So that by my foes,sir I profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends, I am abused.   So that, conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why then the worse for my friends and the better for my foes.
I shall be pinched to death.
[aside to PROSPERO]  Was t well done?
Sirrah, come hither: tis no time to jest,    And therefore frame your manners to the time.    Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,    Puts my apparel and my countenance on,    And I for my escape have put on his;    For in a quarrel since I came ashore    I killed a man and fear I was descried.    Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,    While I make way from hence to save my life.    You understand me?
[within]  A sail, a sail, a sail!
Sweet now, silence.    Juno and Ceres whisper seriously.    Theres something else to do. Hush and be mute,    Or else our spell is marred.
[Reciting to himself]   'When we for recompense have    praised the vile,    It stains the glory in that happy verse    Which aptly sings the good.'
What mean you?
Gentleman, God save thee.
But I can give thee more,    For I will raise her statue in pure gold,    That whiles Verona by that name is known,    There shall no figure at such rate be set    As that of true and faithful Juliet.
That, at her hands, which the kings King forbids.
That would be son to great Antiochus.
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
A contract of eternal bond of love,    Confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands,    Attested by the holy close of lips,    Strengthened by interchangement of your rings,    And all the ceremony of this compact    Sealed in my function, by my testimony,    Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave    I have traveled but two hours.
[t    o  ANTONIO   ]  Ill be with you anon.
If he be credulous and trust my tale,    Ill make him glad to seem Vincentio    And give assurance to Baptista Minola    As if he were the right Vincentio.    Take in your love, and then let me alone.
I think that one of them is hereabout,And cannot make away.
What, in my sight?Bianca, get thee in.
Ho, Helicanus!
By heaven, you do me wrong!
Yes, a dozen, and as many to th' vantage as would storethe world they played for.    But I do think it is their husbands' faults    If wives do fall.   Say that they slack their duties    And pour our treasures into foreign laps,    Or else break out in peevish jealousies,    Throwing restraint upon us.   Or say they strike us,    Or scant our former having in despite.    Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,    Yet have we some revenge.   Let husbands know    Their wives have sense like them. They see and smell    And have their palates both for sweet and sour,    As husbands have.   What is it that they do    When they change us for others? Is it sport?    I think it is. And doth affection breed it?    I think it doth. Is t frailty that thus errs?    It is so too. And have not we affections,    Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?    Then let them use us well, else let them know,    The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.
That was in thy rage.    Speak it again and, even with the word,    This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love,    Shall for thy love kill a far truer love.    To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.
I will go seek him.Cassio, walk hereabout.    If I do find him fit, Ill move your suit    And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
My lord, here is my bill.
'Twas you we laughed at.
Why, this is very midsummer madness.
Its the wind.
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.    The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post.    There, at your meetest vantage of the time,    Infer the bastardy of Edwards children.    Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen    Only for saying he would make his son    Heir to the Crownmeaning indeed his house,    Which, by the sign thereof, was termèd so.    Moreover, urge his hateful luxury    And bestial appetite in change of lust,    Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,    Even where his raging eye or savage heart,    Without control, lusted to make his prey.    Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:    Tell them when that my mother went with child    Of that insatiate Edward,   noble York    My princely father then had wars in France,    And, by true computation of the time,    Found that the issue was not his begot,    Which well appearèd in his lineaments,    Being nothing like the noble duke my father.    Yet touch this sparingly, as twere far off,    Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.
You see this fellow that is gone before,    He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar    And give direction.   And do but see his vice,    'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,    The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of him.    I fear the trust Othello puts him in    On some odd time of his infirmity    Will shake this island.
He hath confessed.
The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
Relent? No. 'Tis cowardly and womanish.
A flourish, trumpets! Strike alarum, drums! Let not the heavens hear these telltale womenRail on the Lords anointed. Strike, I say!
Will it be ever thus?   Ungracious wretch,    Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,    Where manners ne'er were preachd!   Out of my sight!    Be not offended, dear Cesario.    Rudesby, be gone!
M. But then there is no consonancy in the sequel.    That suffers under probation. A should follow but O does.
Ay, that's my boy! thy father hath full oftFor his ungrateful country done the like.
And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift,For which I wait for money.
[Aside to SAMPSON]  No.
(  aside  ) And with what wing the staniel checks at it!
My other self, my councils consistory,    My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin,    I, as a child, will go by thy direction    Toward Ludlow then, for well not stay behind.
Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand.
Yonder comes a poet and a painter: the plague of    company light upon thee!   I will fear to catch it    and give way: when I know not what else to do, I'll    see thee again.
First know thou, I begot him on the empress.
And as he saith, so say we all with him.
Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! Thieves! Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!Thieves! thieves!
If he say so, may his pernicious soul    Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th' heart.    She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
Noble Ventidius! Well;    I am not of that feather to shake off    My friend when he must need me.   I do know him    A gentleman that well deserves a help:    Which he shall have: I'll pay the debt,    and free him.
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise    And dangerous success of bloody wars    As I intend more good to you and yours    Than ever you or yours were by me harmed!
Mistress, what cheer?
Who made thee then a bloody ministerWhen gallant-springing, brave Plantagenet, That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
God in heaven bless her!You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
[taking his hand]   Now, sir, thought is free.   I pray you, bring your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.
But she received my dog?
To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,    For it was sometime target to a king;    I know it by this mark.   He loved me dearly,    And for his sake I wish the having of it;    And that you'ld guide me to your sovereign's court,    Where with it I may appear a gentleman;    And if that ever my low fortune's better,    I'll pay your bounties; till then rest your debtor.
I will not stay to offend you.
Orsino, this is that Antonio    That took the    Phoenix    and her fraught from Candy,    And this is he that did the    Tiger    board    When your young nephew Titus lost his leg.    Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,    In private brabble did we apprehend him.
I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment and reason.
[aside to the other attendants]  The king is angry. See, he gnaws his lip.
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?    Bianca, stand aside.Poor girl, she weeps!    [To BIANCA]   Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.    [To KATHERINE]   For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit!    Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?    When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Is this your speeding? Nay, then, good night our part.
Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discernst thou aught in that? Is he not honest?
[offering him the crown]     Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.    Lo, here this long-usurpèd royalty    From the dead temples of this bloody wretch    Have I plucked off, to grace thy brows withal.    Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Her honor is an essence thats not seen,They have it very oft that have it not.But for the handkerchief
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
Hes now in Florence.
Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is thisWhich dances with your daughter?
Oh, Oh, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
Well not run, Monsieur Monster.
Silence! One word more    Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What,    An advocate for an imposter?   Hush,    Thou thinkst there is no more such shapes as he,    Having seen but him and Caliban.   Foolish wench,    To th' most of men this is a Caliban    And they to him are angels.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalts death,    And therefore have I little talked of love,    For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.    Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous    That she do give her sorrow so much sway,    And in his wisdom hastes our marriage    To stop the inundation of her tears    Which, too much minded by herself alone,    May be put from her by society.    Now do you know the reason of this haste.
[reads]    By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it.   Though you have put me into darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefitof my senses as well as your Ladyship.   I have your own letter that induced me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt not but to do myself much right or youmuch shame.   Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little unthought of and speak out of my injury. The madly used Malvolio.
This is the man. Do thy office.
Madam!
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
What is his name?
Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.
O let no noble eye profane a tear    For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear:    As confident as is the falcon's flight    Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.    My loving lord, I take my leave of you;    Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;    Not sick, although I have to do with death,    But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.    Lo, as at English feasts, so I regret    The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:    O thou, the earthly author of my blood,    Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,    Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up    To reach at victory above my head,    Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers;    And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,    That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,    And furnish new the name of John a Gaunt,    Even in the lusty havior of his son.
All happiness to your honour!
Yet banishèd? Hang up philosophy!    Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,    Displant a town, reverse a princes doom,    It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
O my most sacred lady!    Temptations have since then been born to's; for    In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;    Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes    Of my young play-fellow.
Get on your cloak, and haste you to Lord Timon;    Importune him for my moneys; be not ceased    With slight denial, nor then silenced when    'Commend me to your master'and the cap    Plays in the right hand, thus:   but tell him,    My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn    Out of mine own; his days and times are past    And my reliances on his fracted dates    Have smit my credit:   I love and honour him,    But must not break my back to heal his finger;    Immediate are my needs, and my relief    Must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words,    But find supply immediate.   Get you gone:    Put on a most importunate aspect,    A visage of demand; for, I do fear,    When every feather sticks in his own wing,    Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,    Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.
[to PRINCE]  What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
For what, I pray thee?
I will not leave him now till CassioBe called to him.How is t with you, my lord?
Now, mild may be thy life!    For a more blustrous birth had never babe:    Quiet and gentle thy conditions!   for    Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world    That ever was prince's child. Happy what follows!    Thou hast as chiding a nativity    As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make,    To herald thee from the womb:   even at the first    Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit,    With all thou canst find here. Now, the good gods    Throw their best eyes upon't!
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace    As 'longeth to a lovers blessèd case!    Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,    And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
From all dishonesty he can: in this,Unless he take the course that you have done,Commit me for committing honour, trust it,He shall not rule me.
Pray you now, buy it.
I'll force thee yield to my desire.
God make your Majesty joyful, as you have been.
He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.    I'll dive into the burning lake below,    And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.    Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we    No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size;    But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,    Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear:    And, sith there's no justice in earth nor hell,    We will solicit heaven and move the gods    To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs.    Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, Marcus;
No, nor of any shores:Yet I was mortally brought forth, and amNo other than I appear.
[kneeling]  A boon, my sovereign, for my service done.
We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on.
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.
Whats that to us? The time goes by. Away!
My lord,    Before I freely speak my mind herein,    You shall not only take the sacrament    To bury mine intents, but also to effect    Whatever I shall happen to devise.    I see your brows are full of discontent,    Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:    Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay    A plot shall show us all a merry day.
No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things. Well, heavens above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
See, she will speak to him.
Youd be king o' th' isle, sirrah?
Should dying men flatter with those that live?
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Both by myself and many other friends.    But he, his own affections counselor,    Is to himselfI will not say how true,    But to himself so secret and so close,    So far from sounding and discovery,    As is the bud bit with an envious worm,    Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,    Or dedicate his beauty to the same.    Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.    We would as willingly give cure as know.
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth. Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
Confined together    In the same fashion as you gave in charge,    Just as you left them, all prisoners, sir,    In the line grove which weather-fends your cell.    They cannot budge till your release. The king,    His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted,    And the remainder mourning over them,    Brimful of sorrow and dismay.   But chiefly    Him that you termed, sir, the good old Lord Gonzalo,    His tears run down his beard like winters drops    From eaves of reeds.   Your charm so strongly works 'em    That if you now beheld them, your affections    Would become tender.
[to TRINCULO]    How didst thou scape? How camest thou hither? Swear by this bottle how thou camest hither.   I escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which I made of the bark of atree with mine own hands since I was cast ashore.
What said our cousin when you parted with him?
Good day at once.
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
She makes our profession as it were to stink aforethe face of the gods.
I not purpose it.I think, Camillo?
Ladies! what are their wills?
The third of Antioch;And his device, a wreath of chivalry;The word, 'Me pompae provexit apex.'
Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
Within the infant rind of this small flower    Poison hath residence and medicine power.    For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;    Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.    Two such opposèd kings encamp them still,    In man as well as herbsgrace and rude will.    And where the worser is predominant,    Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
[as LUCENTIO]  Fear you not him.Sirrah Biondello,Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.Imagine twere the right Vincentio.
I prithee, peace. My soul is full of sorrow.
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
Rome will despise her for this foul escape.
What then?
It is a kind of history.
[aside]    With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!    To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,    He prettily and aptly taunts himself.    So cunning and so young is wonderful.
Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
[to GONZALO]  I prithee, spare.
[aside]  It goes on, I see,As my soul prompts it. Spirit, fine spirit! Ill free theeWithin two days for this.
Who knows the Lord Protectors mind herein?Who is most inward with the noble duke?
Give me thy hand. I am sorry I beat thee. But while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:    His noble cousin is right welcome hither;    And all the number of his fair demands    Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction:    With all the gracious utterance thou hast    Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.  We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,    To look so poorly and to speak so fair?    Shall we call back Northumberland, and send    Defiance to the traitor, and so die?
O my lord,    You only speak from your distracted soul;    There is not so much left, to furnish out    A moderate table.
This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot,    The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock    That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court;    And who should find them but the empress' villain?    She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not choose    But give them to his master for a present.
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count    That died some twelvemonth since,   then leaving her    In the protection of his son, her brother,    Who shortly also died,   for whose dear love,    They say, she hath abjured the company    And sight of men.
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellentgood clothes: there's no further necessity ofqualities can make her be refused.
May these add to the number that may scald thee!    Let moulten coin be thy damnation,    Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!    Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,    It turns in less than two nights?   O you gods,    I feel master's passion! this slave,    Unto his honour, has my lord's meat in him:    Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,    When he is turn'd to poison?    O, may diseases only work upon't!    And, when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature    Which my lord paid for, be of any power    To expel sickness, but prolong his hour!
If not, let me see thee a servant still.
To serve me well, you all should do me duty: Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects.O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
Let's make no stay.
These differences shall all rest under gage    Till Norfolk be repeal'd:   repeal'd he shall be,    And, though mine enemy, restored again    To all his lands and signories:     when he's return'd,    Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambsAnd throw them in the entrails of the wolf?When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion ofmen, and remain a beast with the beasts?
So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so shakes, and pulls me! Ha, ha, ha!
How dare the plants look up to heaven, from whenceThey have their nourishment?
Very sweet and contagious, i' faith.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford. Farewell, dear father.
[sings]    O mistress mine, where are you roaming?    O, stay and hear! Your true loves coming,    That can sing both high and low:    Trip no further, pretty sweeting.    Journeys end in lovers meeting,    Every wise mans son doth know.
Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.
Had she such power,She had just cause.
We make woe wanton with this fond delay:Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.
Give me your hand, sir.
O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son,    For that I was his father Edward's son;    That blood already, like the pelican,    Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused:    My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,    Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!    May be a precedent and witness good    That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood:    Join with the present sickness that I have;    And thy unkindness be like crooked age,    To crop at once a too long wither'd flower.    Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!    These words hereafter thy tormentors be!    Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:    Love they to live that love and honour have.
Good my lord, forbear:The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your ownWith oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
Who is t that cried?
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.  [He bites his thumb]
And till she come, as truly as to heaven    I do confess the vices of my blood    So justly to your grave ears   Ill present    How I did thrive in this fair ladys love    And she in mine.
Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends. Marry, now I let go your hand, I am barren.
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
(  aside  ) And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
O, let me stay,And comfort you, my master.
How now, old lad?
Well, well see t. Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip. We shall ne'er be younger.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      In all which time, you and your husband Grey    Were factious for the house of Lancaster.    And, Rivers, so were you.   Was not your husband    In Margarets battle at Saint Albans slain?    Let me put in your minds, if you forget,    What you have been ere this, and what you are;    Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
Oh yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face    Such as the daughter of Agenor had,    That made great Jove to humble him to her hand    When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.
I will in Cassios lodging lose this napkin    And let him find it. Trifles light as air    Are to the jealous confirmations strong    As proofs of holy writ.   This may do something.    The Moor already changes with my poison.    Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons    Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,    But with a little act upon the blood    Burn like the mines of sulfur.
You have said, sir. To see this age!   A sentence is buta cheveril glove to a good wit. How quickly the wrong side may be turned outward!
Y'are a baggage, the Slys are no rogues. Look in the chronicleswe came in with Richard Conqueror. Therefore  paucas pallabris  : let the world slide. Sessa!
Oh, I am slain!
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.    [Takes them from BALTHASAR]    Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning    See thou deliver it to my lord and father.    [Gives letter to BALTHASAR]    Give me the light.    [Takes torch from BALTHASAR]    Upon thy life I charge thee,    Whateer thou hearst or seest, stand all aloof,    And do not interrupt me in my course.    Why I descend into this bed of death    Is partly to behold my ladys face,    But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger    A precious ring, a ring that I must use    In dear employment.   Therefore hence, be gone.    But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry    In what I farther shall intend to do,    By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint    And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.    The time and my intents are savage, wild,    More fierce and more inexorable far    Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,    And offer me disguised in sober robes    To old Baptista as a schoolmaster    Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca,    That so I may, by this device at least,    Have leave and leisure to make love to her    And, unsuspected, court her by herself.
By the hour of nine.
I pray, let them be admitted.
Lucentio, gentle sir.
God bless your Grace with health and happy days.
When I wore it at your daughters marriage?
Theyre busy within. You were best knock louder.
His answer was, he would unto the stews,    And from the common'st creature pluck a glove,    And wear it as a favour;   and with that    He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.
Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
You advise me well.
(  seizi    ng  SEBASTIAN)  Come on, sir, hold!
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Head and butt! An hasty-witted bodyWould say your head and butt were head and horn.
I am bound to you:There is some sap in this.
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
Had you such leisure in the time of death To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?
Thus I conceive by him.
What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.
No, uncle, but our crosses on the way Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.I want more uncles here to welcome me.
What advocate hast thou to him?
It were well    The general were put in mind of it.    Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature    Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio    And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?
For me, be you thoughten    That I came with no ill intent; for to me    The very doors and windows savour vilely.    Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue, and    I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.    Hold, here's more gold for thee.    A curse upon him, die he like a thief,    That robs thee of thy goodness!   If thou dost    Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.
Hoyday, a riddle! Neither good nor bad.    What needst thou run so many mile about    When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way?    Once more, what news?
Where my stomach finds meat; or, rather, where I eatit.
Who knows not he is dead! Who knows he is?
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,    I never thought it possible or likely.    But see, while idly I stood looking on,    I found the effect of love in idleness    And now in plainness do confess to thee    That art to me as secret and as dear    As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was,    Tranio,   I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,    If I achieve not this young modest girl.    Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst.    Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Valentine!
I am right glad that his health is well, sir: andwhat hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?
Ay, just; a verse in Horace; right, you have it.   [Aside]     Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!    Here's no sound jest! the old man hath found their guilt;    And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines,    That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.    But were our witty empress well afoot,    She would applaud Andronicus' conceit:    But let her rest in her unrest awhile.    And now, young lords, was't not a happy star    Led us to Rome, strangers, and more than so,    Captives, to be advanced to this height?    It did me good, before the palace gate    To brave the tribune in his brother's hearing.
Believe me, sister, of all the men aliveI never yet beheld that special faceWhich I could fancy more than any other.
And enter in our ears like great triumphersIn their applauding gates.
Mine honest friend,I prithee, but repair to me next morning.
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired    And thus expiring do foretell of him:    His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,    For violent fires soon burn out themselves;    Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;    He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;    With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder:    Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,    Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.    This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,    This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,    This other Eden, demi-paradise,    This fortress built by Nature for herself    Against infection and the hand of war,    This happy breed of men, this little world,    This precious stone set in the silver sea,    Which serves it in the office of a wall,    Or as a moat defensive to a house,    Against the envy of less happier lands,    This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,    This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,    Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth,    Renowned for their deeds as far from home,    For Christian service and true chivalry,    As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,    Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son,    This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,    Dear for her reputation through the world,    Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,    Like to a tenement or pelting farm:    England, bound in with the triumphant sea    Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege    Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,    With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:    That England, that was wont to conquer others,    Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.    Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,    How happy then were my ensuing death!
He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar.
Indeed, they are disproportioned.My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
We are very sorry fort.
And this my neighbour too?
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master,That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty longTo tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
What, in the midst of the street?
Behold him.
Lucius, save the child,    And bear it from me to the empress.    If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things,    That highly may advantage thee to hear:    If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,    I'll speak no more but 'Vengeance rot you all!'
He does me double wrong    That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.    Discharge my followers: let them hence away,    From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.
Art thou Timandra?
And wished to see thee cross-gartered.
Ay, the womans maid of the house.
They vanished strangely.
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?    It must be great that can inherit us    So much as of a thought of ill in him.
To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:    But let him say so then, and let him go;    But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,    We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.    Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure    The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia    You take my lord, I'll give him my commission    To let him there a month behind the gest    Prefix'd for's parting:   yet, good deed, Leontes,    I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind    What lady-she her lord.   You'll stay?
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,    three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made    themselves all men of hair,   they call themselves    Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches    say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are    not in't;   but they themselves are o' the mind, if it    be not too rough for some that know little but    bowling, it will please plentifully.
A nest of traitors!
O, go to. Well, well,Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the godsDo like this worst.
Do not swear at all.Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,Which is the god of my idolatry, And Ill believe thee.
The handkerchief!
[giving money]  Theres for thy pains.
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
A guiltless death I die.
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen, I would begood to thee.
Awaked you not in this sore agony?
[Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.
Noble and young,    When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,    Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,    We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm,    To wipe out our ingratitude with loves    Above their quantity.
After him I love    More than I love these eyes, more than my life,    More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.    If I do feign, you witnesses above,    Punish my life for tainting of my love!
Now must I to the monument alone.    Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.    She will beshrew me much that Romeo    Hath had no notice of these accidents.    But I will write again to Mantua,    And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.    Poor living corpse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
I am changed.
Alas, she has no speech!
By heaven, I think there is no man is secure    But the queens kindred and night-walking heralds    That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.    Heard ye not what an humble suppliant    Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?
O most dear mistress,The sun will set before I shall dischargeWhat I must strive to do.
Ay, thats the theme.To her in haste. Give her this jewel. SayMy love can give no place, bide no denay.  [he hands her a jewel]
'Tis a good piece.
You, you, ay, you!We have done our course. Theres money for your pains.I pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.
So it appears by that I have to say. First, he commends him to your noble self.
The house will be the quieter.
'Tis with cares.
Then say they were not slain. But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.
If there be such a dart in princes' frowns,How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,    Call me before the exactest auditors    And set me on the proof.   So the gods bless me,    When all our offices have been oppress'd    With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept    With drunken spilth of wine, when every room    Hath blazed with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy,    I have retired me to a wasteful cock,    And set mine eyes at flow.
'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks And past.
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us?
What hast thou found?
Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
We had the tune on't a month ago.
Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.
Out upon you! What a man are you?
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged! Give me my sin again.
[sings]    Come away, come away, death,    And in sad cypress let me be laid.    Fly away, fly away breath,    I am slain by a fair cruel maid.    My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,    O, prepare it!    My part of death, no one so true    Did share it.    Not a flower, not a flower sweet    On my black coffin let there be strown.    Not a friend, not a friend greet    My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown.    A thousand thousand sighs to save,    Lay me, O, where    Sad true lover never find my grave,    To weep there!
Right, I mean you.
Go sleep, and hear us.
What am I, sir! Nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods! O fine villain!   A silken doublet, a velvet hose, ascarlet cloak, and a copatain hat! Oh, I am undone, I am undone!   While I play the good husband at home, my sonand my servant spend all at the university.
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter.    I would to God all strifes were well compounded.    My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness    To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
I have no exquisite reason for t, but I have reason good enough.
Villainous whore!
I wonder on't; he was wont to shine at seven.
Come not to me again: but say to Athens,    Timon hath made his everlasting mansion    Upon the beached verge of the salt flood;    Who once a day with his embossed froth    The turbulent surge shall cover:   thither come,    And let my grave-stone be your oracle.    Lips, let sour words go by and language end:    What is amiss plague and infection mend!    Graves only be men's works and death their gain!    Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.  [Gives ROMEO JULIETs ring]   Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
Though I am satisfied and need no more    Than what I know, yet shall the oracle    Give rest to the minds of others, such as he    Whose ignorant credulity will not    Come up to the truth.   So have we thought it good    From our free person she should be confined,    Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence    Be left her to perform.   Come, follow us;    We are to speak in public; for this business    Will raise us all.
O master, master, I have watched so long    That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied    An ancient angel coming down the hill    Will serve the turn.
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.
Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.
[Takes the money]  This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
MMalvolio. Mwhy, that begins my name.
I do not know. I am sure I am none such.
He would not stay at your petitions: madeHis business more material.
Fortunate mistress,let my prophecy    Come home to ye!   you must retire yourself    Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat    And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,    Dismantle you, and, as you can,   disliken    The truth of your own seeming; that you may    For I do fear eyes overto shipboard    Get undescried.
Wert thou not banishèd on pain of death?
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,Hath sent a letter to his fathers house.
What, art thou afraid?
Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;But by my coming I have made you happy.
'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,And urged it twice together, did he not?
You're a made old man: if the sins of your youthare forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers    That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,    Now cheer each other in each others love.    Though we have spent our harvest of this king,    We are to reap the harvest of his son.    The broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates,    But lately splintered, knit, and joined together,    Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept.    Meseemeth good that with some little train    Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet    Hither to London, to be crowned our king.
Saw you no more? Marked you not how her sisterBegan to scold and raise up such a stormThat mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
The best, for the innocence.
Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!    How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants    This night englutted! Who is not Timon's?    What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is    Lord Timon's?    Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!    Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,    The breath is gone whereof this praise is made:    Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter showers,    These flies are couch'd.
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you    That by your virtuous means I may again    Exist, and be a member of his love    Whom I, with all the office of my heart    Entirely honor.   I would not be delayed.    If my offence be of such mortal kind    That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,    Nor purposed merit in futurity,    Can ransom me into his love again,    But to know so must be my benefit.    So shall I clothe me in a forced content,    And shut myself up in some other course,    To fortunes alms.
You are married?
I call thee not.
My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon;Your letter is with Jupiter by this.
I go.
This is the old man still.
'Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them.    But since my master and mistress have bought you,    there's no going but by their consent:   therefore I    will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I    doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough.    Come, I'll do for thee what I can; come your ways.
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.
Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage,   and, for turning away, let summer bear it out.
And all those sayings will I overswear;    And those swearings keep as true in soul    As doth that orbèd continent the fire    That severs day from night.
One only daughter have I, no kin else,    On whom I may confer what I have got:    The maid is fair, o' the youngest for a bride,    And I have bred her at my dearest cost    In qualities of the best.  This man of thineAttempts her love: I prithee, noble lord,Join with me to forbid him her resort;Myself have spoke in vain.
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
Thats my noble master!What shall I do? Say, what? What shall I do?
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple.
What is the matter, ho? Who is t that cried?
Since what I am to say must be but that    Which contradicts my accusation and    The testimony on my part no other    But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me    To say 'not guilty:'   mine integrity    Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,    Be so received.   But thus: if powers divine    Behold our human actions, as they do,    I doubt not then but innocence shall make    False accusation blush and tyranny    Tremble at patience.   You, my lord, best know,    Who least will seem to do so, my past life    Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,    As I am now unhappy;   which is more    Than history can pattern, though devised    And play'd to take spectators.   For behold me    A fellow of the royal bed (which owe    A moiety of the throne), a great king's daughter,    The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing    To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore    Who please to come and hear.   For life, I prize it    As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,    'Tis a derivative from me to mine,    And only that I stand for.   I appeal    To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes    Came to your court, how I was in your grace,    How merited to be so;   since he came,    With what encounter so uncurrent I    Have strain'd to appear thus:   i   f one jot beyond    The bound of honour, or in act or will    That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts    Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin    Cry fie upon my grave!
Then as my gift and thine own acquisition    Worthily purchased, take my daughter.   But    If thou dost break her virgin knot before    All sanctimonious ceremonies may    With full and holy rite be ministered,    No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall    To make this contract grow, but barren hate,    Sour-eyed disdain,   and discord shall bestrew    The union of your bed with weeds so loathly    That you shall hate it both.   Therefore take heed,    As Hymens lamps shall light you.
In what you please: I'll do what I can.
But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a manas you.
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
Worse and worse!
Shall I be heard?
We would purge the land of these drones, that robthe bee of her honey.
My lord
What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,    Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.    Susan and sheGod rest all Christian souls!    Were of an age.   Well, Susan is with God.    She was too good for me. But, as I said,    On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.    That shall she.   Marry, I remember it well.    Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,    And she was weanedI never shall forget it    Of all the days of the year, upon that day.    For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,    Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.    My lord and you were then at Mantua.    Nay, I do bear a brain.   But, as I said,    When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple    Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,    To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!    Shake! quoth the dovehouse. Twas no need, I trow,    To bid me trudge.    And since that time it is eleven years,    For then she could stand alone.   Nay, by the rood,    She could have run and waddled all about,    For even the day before, she broke her brow.    And then my husbandGod be with his soul!    He was a merry mantook up the child.    Yea, quoth he, Dost thou fall upon thy face?    Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,    Wilt thou not, Jule?   and, by my holy dame,    The pretty wretch left crying and said ay.    To see now, how a jest shall come about!    I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,    I never should forget it. Wilt thou not, Jule? quoth he.    And, pretty fool, it stinted and said ay.
Pray you lead on. At every house Ill call.    I may command at most.Get weapons, ho!    And raise some special officers of might.    On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.
His name! As if I knew not his name! I have brought himup ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
O, teach me how I should forget to think!
It wears, sir, as it grows.
O your sweet queen!That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither,To have bless'd mine eyes with her!
I make a broken delivery of the business; but the    changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were    very notes of admiration:   they seemed almost, with    staring on one another, to tear the cases of their    eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language    in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard    of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable    passion of wonder appeared in them;   but the wisest    beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not    say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the    extremity of the one, it must needs be.    [Enter another Gentleman]    Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.    The news, Rogero?
Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
Ratcliffe, my lord, tis I. The early village cockHath twice done salutation to the morn.Your friends are up and buckle on their armor.
Then thus I turn me from my country's light,    To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
Good night, Penthesilea.
Let her hang me. He that is well hanged in this world needs to fear no colors.
God save you, sir.
Fear not, my lord, but think    Your grace, that fed my country with your corn,    For which the people's prayers still fall upon you,    Must in your child be thought on.   If neglection    Should therein make me vile, the common body,    By you relieved, would force me to my duty:    But if to that my nature need a spur,    The gods revenge it upon me and mine,    To the end of generation!
My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy.This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.
I'll believe him as an enemy, and give over my trade.
So youre paid.
Why, by making him uncapable of Othellos place: knocking out his brains.
Do me some service, ere I come to thee.    Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder stands;    Now give me some surance that thou art Revenge,    Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot-wheels;    And then I'll come and be thy waggoner,    And whirl along with thee about the globe.    Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,    To hale thy vengeful waggon swift away,    And find out murderers in their guilty caves:    And when thy car is loaden with their heads,    I will dismount, and by the waggon-wheel    Trot, like a servile footman, all day long,    Even from Hyperion's rising in the east    Until his very downfall in the sea:    And day by day I'll do this heavy task,    So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
[aside]  Hover about her; say that right for rightHath dimmed your infant morn to agèd night.
A greater gift than that Ill give my cousin.
Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor,    This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil;    Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him    Till he be brought unto the empress' face,    For testimony of her foul proceedings:    And see the ambush of our friends be strong;    I fear the emperor means no good to us.
[as LITIO]  Madam, my instruments in tune.
Yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him.    Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Here's to thee.
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.    The next news is, I have to London sent    The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:    The manner of their taking may appear    At large discoursed in this paper here.
We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun,    And bleat the one at the other:   what we changed    Was innocence for innocence; we knew not    The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd    That any did.   Had we pursued that life,    And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd    With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven    Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd    Hereditary ours.
The king my father did in Tarsus leave me;    Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife,    Did seek to murder me:   and having woo'd    A villain to attempt it, who having drawn to do't,    A crew of pirates came and rescued me;    Brought me to Mytilene.   But, good sir,    Whither will you have me? Why do you weep?    It may be,    You think me an impostor: no, good faith;    I am the daughter to King Pericles,    If good King Pericles be.
Come hither, knight. Come hither, Fabian. Well whispero'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.
Give me a living reason shes disloyal.
Here, wear this jewel for me. 'Tis my picture.    Refuse it not. It hath no tongue to vex you.    And I beseech you come again tomorrow.    What shall you ask of me that Ill deny,    That honor, saved, may upon asking give?
He last asked the question. Poor rogues, andusurers' men! bawds between gold and want!
What, what! the lustful sons of TamoraPerformers of this heinous, bloody deed?
Stay, murderous villains! will you kill your brother?    Now, by the burning tapers of the sky,    That shone so brightly when this boy was got,    He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point    That touches this my first-born son and heir!    I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,    With all his threatening band of Typhon's brood,    Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,    Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.    What, what, ye sanguine, shallow-hearted boys!    Ye white-limed walls! ye alehouse painted signs!    Coal-black is better than another hue,    In that it scorns to bear another hue;    For all the water in the ocean    Can never turn the swan's black legs to white,    Although she lave them hourly in the flood.    Tell the empress from me, I am of age    To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.
Nay, you must forget that.
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge. Use careful watch. Choose trusty sentinels.
I do not sue to stand;Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.
The cockerel.
Petruchio is my name, Antonios son,A man well known throughout all Italy.
O, twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!
She thanks you.
Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
How now! who is it?
[   aside]    Why speaks my father so ungently? This    Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first    That e'er I sighed for.   Pity move my father    To be inclined my way!
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, nowI am for you again: pray you, sit by us,And tell 's a tale.
Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?
Then westward ho!Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship!Youll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
This Tarsus, o'er which I have the government,    A city on whom plenty held full hand,    For riches strew'd herself even in the streets;    Whose towers bore heads so high they kiss'd the clouds,    And strangers ne'er beheld but wondered at;    Whose men and dames so jetted and adorn'd,    Like one another's glass to trim them by:    Their tables were stored full, to glad the sight,    And not so much to feed on as delight;    All poverty was scorn'd, and pride so great,    The name of help grew odious to repeat.
The news is very fair and good, my lord:Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy. Go to thy coldbed and warm thee.
In her chamber,    Making a sermon of continency to her,    And rails and swears and rates, that she, poor soul,    Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,    And sits as one new-risen from a dream.    Away, away, for he is coming hither!
The hours now come.    The very minute bids thee ope thine ear.    Obey and be attentive.   Canst thou remember    A time before we came unto this cell?    I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not    Out three years old.
I know him well. You are welcome for his sake.
I strike quickly, being moved.
Save you, gentleman.
Thats as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
Master, master, look about you. Who goes there, ha?
And so have I, boy.
Than men their minds! 'Tis true.    O heaven! Were man    But constant, he were perfect.   That one error    Fills him with faults; makes him run through all the sins:    Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.    What is in Silvia's face, but I may spy    More fresh in Julia's with a constant eye?
I dare not, sir.    My master knows not but I am gone hence,    And fearfully did menace me with death    If I did stay to look on his intents.
You are like one that superstitiouslyDoth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies:But yet I know you'll do as I advise.
[reads]  I may command where I adore, But silence, like a Lucrece knife,With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore;M.O.A.I. doth sway my life.
(  sings  )  But I will never die.
Then here is a supplication for you. And when you    come to him, at the first approach you must kneel,    then kiss his foot, then deliver up your pigeons,   and    then look for your reward. I'll be at hand, sir; see    you do it bravely.
Come, sirrah, you must be hanged.
Why, how should she be murdered?
You are i' the right, sir, tis for my mistress.
I saw thee late at the Count Orsinos.
It is a quarrel just and reasonableTo be revenged on him that killed my husband.
I would with such perfection govern, sir,T' excel the Golden Age.
A pillow for his head:    So, leave him all.   Well, my companion friends,    If this but answer to my just belief,    I'll well remember you.
And that would she for twenty thousand more.
Welcome, you!How now, you?What, you!Fellow, you!And thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
Oh, behold,    The riches of the ship is come on shore!    You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.    Hail to thee, lady, and the grace of heaven,    Before, behind thee, and on every hand,    Enwheel thee round!
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
Such wind as scatters young men through the world    To seek their fortunes farther than at home,    Where small experience grows.   But in a few,    Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:    Antonio, my father, is deceased,    And I have thrust myself into this maze,    Happily to wive and thrive as best I may.    Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,    And so am come abroad to see the world.
Well, I have done. But yet
Go, you cot-quean, go.Get you to bed, faith. Youll be sick tomorrowFor this nights watching.
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,    Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,    So many summers dry; scarce any joy    Did ever so long live; no sorrow    But kill'd itself much sooner.
Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong,And I will be revenged on them all.
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,And for your Grace, and yours, my gracious lords.
Excellent. It hangs like flax on a distaff.   And I hopeto see a housewife take thee between her legs and spin it off.
The heavens forbidBut that our loves and comforts should increase,Even as our days do grow.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.    Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,    An hour but married, Tybalt murderèd,    Doting like me, and like me banishèd,    Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair    And fall upon the ground, as I do now,    Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Above my fortunes, yet my state is well.I am a gentleman.
Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.
Thou hast sworn it more to me:Then whither goest? say, whither?
I have no great devotion to the deed    And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.    'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword: he dies.
O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
I hope thou wilt.
Give me.  [reads]  Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.
[as CAMBIO]  Sir, give him head; I know hell prove a jade.
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Why, villain, art not thou the carrier?
They have not been commanded, mighty king.    Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,    Ill muster up my friends and meet your Grace    Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
A solemn air and the best comforter    To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains,    Now useless, boiled within thy skull. There stand,    For you are spell-stopped.    Holy Gonzalo, honorable man,    Mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine,    Fall fellowly drops.   The charm dissolves apace,    And as the morning steals upon the night,    Melting the darkness, so their rising senses    Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle    Their clearer reason.     O good Gonzalo,    My true preserver and a loyal sir    To him you followst, I will pay thy graces    Home both in word and deed.     Most cruelly    Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter.    Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.    Thou art pinched for t now, Sebastian.   Flesh and blood,    You brother mine, that entertained ambition,    Expelled remorse and nature, whom, with Sebastian,    Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong,    Would here have killed your kingI do forgive thee,    Unnatural though thou art.   Their understanding    Begins to swell, and the approaching tide    Will shortly fill the reasonable shore    That now lies foul and muddy.   Not one of them    That yet looks on me, or would know me.   Ariel,    Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell.    I will discase me, and myself present    As I was sometime Milan. Quickly, spirit.    Thou shalt ere long be free.
He is.
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?    This torture should be roared in dismal hell.    Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but ay,    And that bare vowel I shall poison more    Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.    I am not I if there be such an I,    Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer ay.    If he be slain, say ay, or if not, no.    Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.
[giving a coin]  Thou shalt not be the worse for me: theres gold.
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,I would appeach him.
Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools!
A fortnight and odd days.
Mark'd he your music?
Or stole it, rather.
Say it, Othello.
Nay, I am for all waters.
Gramercies, lad, go forward. This contents.The rest will comfort, for thy counsels sound.
What handkerchief?
Yes, I intend so.
No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess,Upon the like devotion as yourselves, To gratulate the gentle princes there.
Whats the matter?
O brave monster! Lead the way.
Bless us!
Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee:    Welcome, dread Fury, to my woful house:    Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.    How like the empress and her sons you are!    Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor:    Could not all hell afford you such a devil?    For well I wot the empress never wags    But in her company there is a Moor;    And, would you represent our queen aright,    It were convenient you had such a devil:    But welcome, as you are. What shall we do?
Tut, shes a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!    Ill tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest    Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,    Ay, by gogs wouns!   quoth he, and swore so loud    That, all amazed, the priest let fall the book,    And as he stooped again to take it up,    The mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff    That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.    Now take them up, quoth he, if any list.
I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, andI'll have done presently.
Sir, in Argier.
As snow in harvest. Come, you deceive yourself.'Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.
When Prospero is destroyed.
Do any thing but this thou doest. Empty    Old receptacles, or common shores, of filth;    Serve by indenture to the common hangman:    Any of these ways are yet better than this;    For what thou professest, a baboon, could he speak,    Would own a name too dear.   O, that the gods    Would safely deliver me from this place!    Here, here's gold for thee.    If that thy master would gain by thee,    Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance,    With other virtues, which I'll keep from boast:    And I will undertake all these to teach.    I doubt not but this populous city will    Yield many scholars.
Look you, I love you well; I'll give you gold,    Rid me these villains from your companies:    Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,    Confound them by some course, and come to me,    I'll give you gold enough.
O, but one word.  [speaks quietly to ANTONIO]
I pray thee, let me look on that again.
How wear the garland? Dost thou mean the crown?
Consumptions sow    In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,    And mar men's spurring.   Crack the lawyer's voice,    That he may never more false title plead,    Nor sound his quillets shrilly: hoar the flamen,    That scolds against the quality of flesh,    And not believes himself:   down with the nose,    Down with it flat; take the bridge quite away    Of him that, his particular to foresee,    Smells from the general weal: make curl'd-pate    ruffians bald;    And let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war    Derive some pain from you:   plague all;    That your activity may defeat and quell    The source of all erection. There's more gold:    Do you damn others, and let this damn you,    And ditches grave you all!
Nay, in all confidence, hes not for Rhodes.
Intended or committed was this fault?    If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,    To win thy after-love I pardon thee.
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
My lord the king, the king!
Dost thou know her?
O princely Buckingham, Ill kiss thy hand    In sign of league and amity with thee.    Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!    Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,    Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate,    And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst,    But Kate,   the prettiest Kate in Christendom,    Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate    For dainties are all Kates   and therefore, Kate,    Take this of me, Kate of my consolation:    Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,    Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded    Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs    Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
Talk you of killing?
Let it be so.    Good night to every one.    [to BRABANTIO]     And, noble signior,    If virtue no delighted beauty lack,    Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
Be collected.No more amazement. Tell your piteous heartTheres no harm done.
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.
Men daily find it. Get thee away, and takeThy beagles with thee.
I have, Antiochus, and, with a soulEmbolden'd with the glory of her praise,Think death no hazard in this enterprise.
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughtsOn his behalf.
For him, I think not on him. For his thoughts,Would they were blanks, rather than filld with me.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse    Full of crusadoes.   And but my noble Moor    Is true of mind and made of no such baseness    As jealous creatures are, it were enough    To put him to ill thinking.
O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted. I will give out divers schedules of my beauty. It shall be inventoried, and every particle and utensil labeled to my will:   as, item, two lips indifferent red; item, two grey eyes, with lids to them; item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you sent hither to praise me?
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something. Make it a word and a blow.
Why, sir, he comes not.
I rather think    You have not sought her help,   of whose soft grace    For the like loss I have her sovereign aid,    And rest myself content.
'Slid, Ill after him again and beat him.
Madam?
Talk not, Signior Gremio. I say he shall go to prison.
See, your guests approach:Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,And let's be red with mirth.
Not yet, I thee beseech:    For ever will I walk upon my knees,    And never see day that the happy sees,    Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy,    By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.
Well, sir.
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?
Oh, but I fear. How lost you company?
[trying to give CALIBAN drink]     Come on your ways. Open your mouth. Here is that which will give language to you, cat. Open your mouth.   This will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and that soundly. You cannot tell whos your friend. Open your chaps again.
Never.
This is true that I say: an I had thee in place where,thou shouldst know it.
Belike you slew great number of his people?
Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind    I see thy glory like a shooting star    Fall to the base earth from the firmament.    Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,    Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest:    Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,    And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
Say there be;    Yet nature is made better by no mean    But nature makes that mean:   so, over that art    Which you say adds to nature, is an art    That nature makes.   You see, sweet maid, we marry    A gentler scion to the wildest stock,    And make conceive a bark of baser kind    By bud of nobler race:   this is an art    Which does mend nature, change it rather, but    The art itself is nature.
All our bills.
Think so, Iago?
How now, my metal of India?
I have: but what of him?
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence    Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers    Into your favor.    When remedies are past, the griefs are ended    By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.    To mourn a mischief that is past and gone    Is the next way to draw new mischief on.    What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,    Patience her injury a mock'ry makes.    The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief,    He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
Make haste. The hour of death is expiate.
If you refuse it, as in love and zeal    Loath to depose the child, your brothers son    As well we know your tenderness of heart    And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,    Which we have noted in you to your kindred    And equally indeed to all estates    Yet know whe'er you accept our suit or no,    Your brothers son shall never reign our king,    But we will plant some other in the throne,    To the disgrace and downfall of your house.    And in this resolution here we leave you.    Come, citizens. Zounds, Ill entreat no more.
Sir,    Having often of your open bounty tasted,    Hearing you were retired, your friends fall'n off,    Whose thankless naturesO abhorred spirits!    Not all the whips of heaven are large enough:    What! to you,    Whose star-like nobleness gave life and influence    To their whole being! I am rapt and cannot cover    The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude    With any size of words.
Mistress Mary, if you prized my ladys favor at anything more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule.   She shall know of it, by this hand.
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,As my true service shall deserve your love.
E'en at hand, alighted by this. And therefore be not Cocks passion, silence! I hear my master.
At nine i' th' morning here well meet again.    Othello, leave some officer behind    And he shall our commission bring to you,    And such things else of quality and respect    As doth import you.
No way but gentleness, gently, gently. The fiend is rough and will not be roughly used.
Foul, wrinkled witch, what makst thou in my sight?
Have with you.
Hold thy peace, thou knave, knight? I shall be constrained in t to call thee knave, knight.
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Name him.
Good sir, be a man,    Think every bearded fellow thats but yoked    May draw with you.   Theres millions now alive    That nightly lie in those unproper beds    Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.    Oh, tis the spite of hell, the fiends arch-mock,    To lip a wanton in a secure couch,    And to suppose her chaste.   No, let me know,    And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
Heigh, my hearts! Cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! Yare! Yare!Take in the topsail. Tend to th' masters whistle. Blow, till thou burst thy wind, if room enough!
Oh, tis foul in her.
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart    Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels.    For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase,    Ill be a candle holder, and look on.    The game was neer so fair, and I am done.
O lady Fortune,Stand you auspicious!
My lord?
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.
We will descend and fold him in our arms.    Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,    So be thy fortune in this royal fight!    Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,    Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
I will not think but they ascend the sky,    And there awake Gods gentle-sleeping peace.     [aside to BUCKINGHAM]     O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!    Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,    His venom tooth will rankle to the death.    Have naught to do with him. Beware of him.    Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,    And all their ministers attend on him.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
Tell on thy mind; I say thy child shall live.
You have no cause.
Of this was Tamora delivered;    The issue of an irreligious Moor,    Chief architect and plotter of these woes:    The villain is alive in Titus' house,    And as he is, to witness this is true.    Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge    These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience,    Or more than any living man could bear.    Now you have heard the truth, what say you, Romans?    Have we done aught amiss,show us wherein,    And, from the place where you behold us now,    The poor remainder of Andronici    Will, hand in hand, all headlong cast us down.    And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,    And make a mutual closure of our house.    Speak, Romans, speak; and if you say we shall,    Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.
Dues! Whence are you?
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commandedNone should come at him.
Come, Ill go in with you.
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.
I never knew woman love man so.
Pink for flower.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.    This is a trick to put me from my suit.    Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst takeno money of me; but being enthralled as I am, itwill also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
Lets ha' t, good Grumio.
Whilst I remember    Her and her virtues, I cannot forget    My blemishes in them,   and so still think of    The wrong I did myself; which was so much,    That heirless it hath made my kingdom and    Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man    Bred his hopes out of.
Hortensio, hark.This gentleman is happily arrived,My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.    If that thy bent of love be honorable,    Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow    By one that Ill procure to come to thee    Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,    And all my fortunes at thy foot Ill lay    And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
Go thou, and fill another room in hell.
Highest queen of state,Great Juno, comes. I know her by her gait.
Sir, have pity,Ill be his surety.
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury.Wishing him my meat. Sure, he's a gallant gentleman.
Nay, I have offered all, I have no more,And she can have no more than all I have.  [To BAPTISTA]  If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
Is this wind westerly that blows?
Even he, my lord.
Dost thou forgetFrom what a torment I did free thee?
Ay, to eleven; and brought them down again. Butshall I search the market?
And you, sir.
And what's the third?
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.    Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!    Your love says, like an honest gentleman,    Where is your mother?
O momentary grace of mortal men,    Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!    Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks    Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,    Ready with every nod to tumble down    Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
Is this the Athenian minion, whom the worldVoiced so regardfully?
So two, together weeping, make one woe.    Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;    Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.    Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.
These were his very words.
I did impeticos thy gratillity, for Malvolios nose is no whipstock.   My lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.
I hope the king made peace with all of us;And the compact is firm and true in me.
She shall not.
It cannot be.
Better it were they all came by his father,    Or by the father there were none at all,    For emulation who shall now be nearest    Will touch us all too near if God prevent not.    O, full of danger is the duke of Gloucester,    And the queens sons and brothers haught and proud,    And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,    This sickly land might solace as before.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
More health and happiness betide my liegeThan can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!
Th exchange of thy loves faithful vow for mine.
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,    After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,    Are idly bent on him that enters next,    Thinking his prattle to be tedious;    Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes    Did scowl on gentle Richard;   no man cried 'God save him!'    No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:    But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:    Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,    His face still combating with tears and smiles,    The badges of his grief and patience,    That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd    The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted    And barbarism itself have pitied him.    But heaven hath a hand in these events,    To whose high will we bound our calm contents.    To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,    Whose state and honour I for aye allow.
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,Mistlike, infold me from the search of eyes.
Now, if you love me, stay.
Who? That Petruchio came?
Many do keep their chambers are not sick:    And, if it be so far beyond his health,    Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,    And make a clear way to the gods.
I do believe thee:    I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:    Be pilot to me and thy places shall    Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and    My people did expect my hence departure    Two days ago.   This jealousy    Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,    Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,    Must it be violent, and as he does conceive    He is dishonour'd by a man which ever    Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must    In that be made more bitter.   Fear o'ershades me:    Good expedition be my friend, and comfort    The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing    Of his ill-ta'en suspicion!   Come, Camillo;    I will respect thee as a father if    Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.
You say well.
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,    Her father and her country, and her friends,    To be called whore? Would it not make one weep?
As great to me as late. And, supportable    To make the dear loss,   have I means much weaker    Than you may call to comfort you, for I    Have lost my daughter.
If it prove    She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where    I lodge my wife;   I'll go in couples with her;    Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;    For every inch of woman in the world,    Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.
I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears for my labor.
What trumpet's that?
Might we but have that happiness, my lord, that youwould once use our hearts, whereby we might expresssome part of our zeals, we should think ourselvesfor ever perfect.
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes
Now, blessing on thee! rise; thou art my child.    Give me fresh garments. Mine own, Helicanus;    She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been,    By savage Cleon:   she shall tell thee all;    When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge    She is thy very princess. Who is this?
Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,That shakes not, though they blow perpetually.
He could never come better; he shall come in. Ilove a ballad but even too well, if it be dolefulmatter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thingindeed and sung lamentably.
'Twas Helicanus then.
O Valentine, this I endure for thee!
Have you that holy feeling in your souls    To counsel me to make my peace with God,    And art you yet to your own souls so blind    That thou will war with God by murd'ring me?    O sirs, consider: they that set you on    To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle    That so approve the Moor.   Oh, let the heavens    Give him defense against the elements,    For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
I will say of it,It tutors nature: artificial strifeLives in these touches, livelier than life.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
What's to be thought of him? does the rumour holdfor true, that he's so full of gold?
Now, whats the business?
Why, what art thou?
Saying, Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on your niece give me this prerogative of speech
Thou speak'st truth.    No more such wives; therefore, no wife:   one worse,    And better used, would make her sainted spirit    Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,    Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd,    And begin, 'Why to me?'
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieveAt knowing of thy choice.
I am for it, lieutenant, and Ill do you justice.
I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.
[to FERDINAND]    Look thou be true. Do not give dalliance    Too much the rein.   The strongest oaths are straw    To th' fire i' th' blood. Be more abstemious,    Or else, goodnight your vow.
But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would you could make it another.
He, for his fathers sake, so loves the prince That he will not be won to aught against him.
Look, who kneels here! Flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa;Thy burden at the sea, and call'd MarinaFor she was yielded there.
The which when any shall not gratify,    Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,    Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves,    The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils!    Till when,the which I hope shall ne'er be seen,    Your grace is welcome to our town and us.
There is, there is.
Why, how dost thou, man? What is the matter with thee?
Smilest thou? I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
[to CALIBAN]    Thou liest, most ignorant monster. I am incase to justle a constable. Why, thou deboshed fish, thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as I today?   Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?
I thought thou hadst been resolute.
Well-a-day that you were, sir.
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
Hope I may choose, sir.
Despised, distressèd, hated, martyred, killed!    Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now    To murder, murder our solemnity?    O child, O child! My soul, and not my child!    Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,    And with my child my joys are buried.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,But I will watch you from such watching now.
God ye good een, fair gentlewoman.
Fool, Ill requite it in the highest degree. I prithee,be gone.
Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.
Think you so, sir?
And still, as you are weary of this weight,Rest you, whiles I lament King Henrys corse.
No, coz, I rather weep.
I will be his conduct.
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
I cannot say 'tis pityShe lacks instructions, for she seems a mistressTo most that teach.
As rich shall Romeos by his ladys lie,Poor sacrifices of our enmity.
In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms,And every hour more competitorsFlock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence!
Mistress, how mean you that?
I am in this commanded to deliver    The noble duke of Clarence to your hands.    I will not reason what is meant hereby    Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.    There lies the duke asleep, and there the keys.     [He hands them the keys]     Ill to the king and signify to him    That thus I have resigned my charge to you.
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:    We have always truly served you, and beseech you    So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,    As recompense of our dear services    Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,    Which being so horrible, so bloody, must    Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.
Say that I slew them not.
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon    This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,    Both dame and servant;   welcomed all, served all;    Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,    At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle;    On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire    With labour and the thing she took to quench it,    She would to each one sip.   You are retired,    As if you were a feasted one and not    The hostess of the meeting:   pray you, bid    These unknown friends to's welcome; for it is    A way to make us better friends, more known.    Come, quench your blushes and present yourself    That which you are, mistress o' the feast:   come on,    And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,    As your good flock shall prosper.
Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent.   Or tobe turned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?
He is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on carpet consideration, but he is a devil in private brawl.   Souls and bodies hath he divorced three, and his incensement at this moment is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death and sepulchre.   Hob, nob, is his word. Give t or take t.
Ay me! Sad hours seem long.Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchants part,And venture madly on a desperate mart.
One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore,    Be sure of it.   Give me the ocular proof    Or by the worth of mine eternal soul    Thou hadst been better have been born a dog    Than answer my waked wrath!
I am content you shall entreat me stay,But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
Oh, the heavens!
The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.
Where?
Nor would I there reside,    To put my father in impatient thoughts    By being in his eye.   Most gracious Duke,    To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear    And let me find a charter in your voice,    T' assist my simpleness.
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,    And I will stand the hazard of the die.    I think there be six Richmonds in the field;    Five have I slain today instead of him.    A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
Ay, but why?
He came with flowers to strew his ladys grave,    And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.    Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,    And by and by my master drew on him,    And then I ran away to call the watch.
Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edwards hands.
Hist! Romeo, hist!Oh, for a falconers voice,    To lure this tassel-gentle back again!    Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,    Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,    And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,    With repetition of My Romeo!
Hold, Toby! On thy life I charge thee, hold!
No, he must not.
[aside]  This will I tell my lady straight. I would not be in some of your coats for two pence.
That is the cause we trouble you so early;'Tis not our husbandry.
Thou dost, and thinkst it much to tread the ooze    Of the salt deep,    To run upon the sharp wind of the north,    To do me business in the veins o' th' earth    When it is baked with frost.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
By Janus, I think no.
Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way!    They dance! they are mad women.    Like madness is the glory of this life.    As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.    We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves;    And spend our flatteries, to drink those men    Upon whose age we void it up again,    With poisonous spite and envy.    Who lives that's not depraved or depraves?    Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves    Of their friends' gift?    I should fear those that dance before me now    Would one day stamp upon me: 't has been done;    Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
You have said now.
We will, my noble lord.
Is t possible, my lord?
Ay, whats o'clock?
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, When men are unprepared and look not for it.
Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter, and thou artA villain.
My life upon her faith!Honest Iago,    My Desdemona must I leave to thee.    I prithee, let thy wife attend on her,    And bring them after in the best advantage.    Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour    Of love, of worldly matter and direction,    To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
'Farewell:'    And, for my heart disdained that my tongue    Should so profane the word,   that taught me craft    To counterfeit oppression of such grief    That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.    Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours    And added years to his short banishment,    He should have had a volume of farewells;    But since it would not, he had none of me.
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.
[aside]  When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.
Ancient, conduct them. You best know the place.
No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.
Thou makest me merry. I am full of pleasure.    Let us be jocund.   Will you troll the catch    You taught me but whilere?
What says she to my valour?
What boots it thee to call thyself a sun?
You mock me, madam. This is not the wayTo win your daughter.
[aside]  As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.
Not yet.
Worthy Timon,
Look, who comes here: will you be chid?
Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus?
Didst thou not say he lied?
Either be patient and entreat me fair,Or with the clamorous report of warThus will I drown your exclamations.
Break up the seals and read.
What dost thou mean?
By a name    I know not how to tell thee who I am.    My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself    Because it is an enemy to thee.    Had I it written, I would tear the word.
We speak in vain.
I feel 't upon my bones.
To make an act of tragic violence.    Edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead.    Why grow the branches when the root is gone?    Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?    If you will live, lament. If die, be brief,    That our swift-wingèd souls may catch the kings,    Or, like obedient subjects, follow him    To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
Hath he said any thing?
Are you ready, sir?
What, of Venice?
Oh, thats an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,But I will have my lord and you againAs friendly as you were.
I go, my lord.
I hold it ever,    Virtue and cunning were endowments greater    Than nobleness and riches:   careless heirs    May the two latter darken and expend;    But immortality attends the former.    Making a man a god.   'Tis known, I ever    Have studied physic, through which secret art,    By turning o'er authorities, I have,    Together with my practise,   made familiar    To me and to my aid the blest infusions    That dwell in vegetives, in metals, stones;    And I can speak of the disturbances    That nature works, and of her cures;   which doth give me    A more content in course of true delight    Than to be thirsty after tottering honour,    Or tie my treasure up in silken bags,    To please the fool and death.
A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,    I had been still a happy king of men.    Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:    Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,    As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.    In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire    With good old folks and let them tell thee tales    Of woeful ages long ago betid;    And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,    Tell thou the lamentable tale of me    And send the hearers weeping to their beds  :  For why, the senseless brands will sympathize    The heavy accent of thy moving tongue    And in compassion weep the fire out;    And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,    For the deposing of a rightful king.
Why, this it is when men are ruled by women.    'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower.    My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, tis she    That tempers him to this extremity.    Was it not she and that good man of worship,    Anthony Woodeville, her brother there,    That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,    From whence this present day he is delivered?    We are not safe, Clarence. We are not safe.
This will I do, and soon return again.
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
A man whom both the waters and the wind,    In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball    For them to play upon, entreats you pity him:    He asks of you, that never used to beg.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir,My father's dead.
An if I live until I be a man,Ill win our ancient right in France againOr die a soldier, as I lived a king.
Fetch drier logs.Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.
By Him that raised me to this careful height    From that contented hap which I enjoyed,    I never did incense his majesty    Against the duke of Clarence, but have been    An earnest advocate to plead for him.    My lord, you do me shameful injury    Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
Thanks, gentle Romans: may I govern so,    To heal Rome's harms, and wipe away her woe!    But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,    For nature puts me to a heavy task:    Stand all aloof:   but, uncle, draw you near,    To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk.    O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,
My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,As far as land will let me, by your side.
Marry, and it shall be done tomorrow morning if I live. My lady would not lose him for more than Ill say.
If you have any music that may not be heard, to t again. But, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.
O thou dull Moor! That handkerchief thou speakst of    I found by fortune and did give my husband.    For often, with a solemn earnestness    More than indeed belonged to such a trifle    He begged of me to steal it.
I'll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.
You gods, look down    And from your sacred vials pour your graces    Upon my daughter's head!   Tell me, mine own.    Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found    Thy father's court?   for thou shalt hear that I,    Knowing by Paulina that the oracle    Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved    Myself to see the issue.
Who was it?
Forgot you! No, sir. I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.
It cannot fail but by    The violation of my faith; and then    Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together    And mar the seeds within!   Lift up thy looks:    From my succession wipe me, father; I    Am heir to my affection.
We shall be short in our provision.Tis now near night.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Considers she my possessions?
Ant please your Honor, playersThat offer service to your Lordship.
Come, lets do so.For every minute is expectancyOf more arrivance.
Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,    Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave:    Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
She said so. I must needs report the truth.
For a worthy ladyAnd one whom much I honour.
Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
Why would she have me kill'd?    Now, as I can remember, by my troth,    I never did her hurt in all my life:    I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn    To any living creature: believe me, la,    I never kill'd a mouse, nor hurt a fly:    I trod upon a worm against my will,    But I wept for it.   How have I offended,    Wherein my death might yield her any profit,    Or my life imply her any danger?
Thou fond mad woman,    Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?    A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,    And interchangeably set down their hands,    To kill the king at Oxford.
My ladys a Cataian. We are politicians, Malvolios a Peg- a-Ramsey, and    (sings) Three merry men be we.    Am notI consanguineous? Am I not of her blood? Tillyvally! Lady!   (    sings) There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady!
To me he seems like diamond to glass.
[to MIRANDA]  The fringèd curtains of thine eye advanceAnd say what thou seest yond.
Ill warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.
If in her marriage my consent be missing,    I call the gods to witness,   I will choose    Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world,    And dispossess her all.
Oh, thou art wise! 'Tis certain.
Why, how now, Stephano?
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be briska while, and the longer liver take all.
How long have you been of this profession?
I did say so.    Look, where he comes. Not poppy nor mandragora    Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,    Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep    Which thou owedst yesterday.
A segregation of the Turkish fleet.    For do but stand upon the foaming shore,    The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,    The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane,    Seems to cast water on the burning bear,    And quench the guards of th' ever-fixèd pole.    I never did like molestation view    On the enchafèd flood.
I was promised them against the feast; but they comenot too late now.
He, he, tis he.
This is desperate, sir.
Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you.    You drew your sword upon me without cause,    But I bespoke you fair and hurt you not.
He named Sebastian. I my brother know    Yet living in my glass.   Even such and so    In favor was my brother, and he went    Still in this fashion, color, ornament,    For him I imitate.   Oh, if it prove,    Tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love!
You may deny that you were not the meanOf my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.
She was false as water.
No, truly, sir. Not a penny.
I go, I go.
Report thy parentage.   I think thou said'st    Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury,    And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine,    If both were open'd.
(within) Bow-wow.
What thinkst thou then of Stanley? Will not he?
There was a man
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?
Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.
O, why should wrath be mute, and fury dumb?    I am no baby, I, that with base prayers    I should repent the evils I have done:    Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did    Would I perform, if I might have my will;    If one good deed in all my life I did,    I do repent it from my very soul.
To fight on Edwards party for the crown;    And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up.    I would to God my heart were flint, like Edwards,    Or Edwards soft and pitiful, like mine.    I am too childish-foolish for this world.
Was never widow had so dear a loss.
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.
Out of her favor, where I am in love.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.    Now will he sit under a medlar tree    And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit    As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.    O Romeo, that she were! Oh, that she were    An open arse, and thou a poperin pear.    Romeo, good night. Ill to my truckle bed.    This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.    Come, shall we go?
You're a dog.
An thou shouldst, thou 'ldst anger ladies.
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to    Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.    If therefore you dare trust my honesty,    That lies enclosed in this trunk which you    Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!    Your followers I will whisper to the business,    And will by twos and threes at several posterns    Clear them o' the city.   For myself, I'll put    My fortunes to your service, which are here    By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;    For, by the honour of my parents, I    Have utter'd truth:   which if you seek to prove,    I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer    Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon    His execution sworn.
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?In his tail.
Alice Madam, or Joan Madam?
I will, my lord.    Beseech you, first go with me to my house,    Where shall be shown you all was found with her;    How she came placed here in the temple;    No needful thing omitted.
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.Proud can I never be of what I hate,But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
Marry, will I, sir. And for that I promised you, Ill be as good as my word. He will bear you easily and reinswell.
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?    Have I been ever free, and must my house    Be my retentive enemy, my gaol?    The place which I have feasted, does it now,    Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?
Are they returned to the court?
About my stature; for at Pentecost,    When all our pageants of delight were play'd,    Our youth got me to play the woman's part,    And I was trimm'd in Madam Julia's gown,    Which served me as fit, by all men's judgments,    As if the garment had been made for me:    Therefore I know she is about my height.    And at that time I made her weep agood,    For I did play a lamentable part:    Madam, 'twas Ariadne passioning    For Theseus' perjury and unjust flight;    Which I so lively acted with my tears    That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,    Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead    If I in thought felt not her very sorrow!
Let me go, sir, or Ill knock you o'er the mazzard.
It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
They that add, moreover, hes drunk nightly in your company.
At this same ancient feast of Capulets    Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves    With all the admired beauties of Verona.    Go thither, and with unattainted eye    Compare her face with some that I shall show,    And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
Veronas summer hath not such a flower.
One of the prettiest touches of all and that which    angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not    the fish,   was when, at the relation of the queen's    death, with the manner how she came to't bravely    confessed and lamented by the king,   how    attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one    sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,'    I would fain say, bleed tears,   for I am sure my    heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed    colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world    could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.
Why, then tis time to arm and give direction.     [his oration to his soldiers]     More than I have said, loving countrymen,    The leisure and enforcement of the time    Forbids to dwell upon.   Yet remember this:    God and our good cause fight upon our side.    The prayers of holy saints and wrongèd souls,    Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces.    Richard except, those whom we fight against    Had rather have us win than him they follow.    For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,    A bloody tyrant and a homicide;    One raised in blood, and one in blood established;    One that made means to come by what he hath,    And slaughtered those that were the means to help him;    A base foul stone, made precious by the foil    Of Englands chair, where he is falsely set;    One that hath ever been Gods enemy.    Then if you fight against Gods enemy,    God will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers.    If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,    You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain.    If you do fight against your countrys foes,    Your countrys fat shall pay your pains the hire.    If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,    Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors.    If you do free your children from the sword,    Your childrens children quits it in your age.    Then, in the name of God and all these rights,    Advance your standards. Draw your willing swords.    For me, the ransom of my bold attempt    Shall be this cold corpse on the earths cold face;    But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt    The least of you shall share his part thereof.    Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully;    God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!
You have little cause to say so.
'Tis a strange truth.
No, boy.
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.
A knave teach me my duty?Ill beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.
Rage must be withstood:Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?    What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?    In leads or oils?   what old or newer torture    Must I receive, whose every word deserves    To taste of thy most worst?   Thy tyranny    Together working with thy jealousies,    Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle    For girls of nine, O, think what they have done    And then run mad indeed, stark mad!   for all    Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.    That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing;    That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant    And damnable ingrateful:   nor was't much,    Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,    To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,    More monstrous standing by:   whereof I reckon    The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter    To be or none or little; though a devil    Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:    Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death    Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,    Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart    That could conceive a gross and foolish sire    Blemish'd his gracious dam:   this is not, no,    Laid to thy answer: but the last,O lords,    When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,    The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,    and vengeance for't    Not dropp'd down yet.
To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curseAbides in me. I say amen to her.
No, no, by Gods good grace, his son shall reign.
[To HORTENSIO as LITIO]    Well, go with me and be not so discomfited.    Proceed in practice with my younger daughter.    Shes apt to learn and thankful for good turns.    Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,    Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
O, he sends you for a picture.
No? Why? When he that is my husband now    Came to me, as I followed Henrys corse,    When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands    Which issued from my other angel husband    And that dear saint which then I weeping followed    O, when, I say, I looked on Richards face,    This was my wish: be thou, quoth I, accursed    For making me, so young, so old a widow;    And, when thou weddst, let sorrow haunt thy bed;    And be thy wife, if any be so mad,    More miserable by the life of thee    Than thou hast made me by my dear lords death.    Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,    Within so small a time my womans heart    Grossly grew captive to his honey words    And proved the subject of mine own souls curse,    Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest,    For never yet one hour in his bed    Did I enjoyed the golden dew of sleep,    But with his timorous dreams was still awaked.    Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,    And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle.    If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him    That is renowned for faith?   Be fickle, fortune,    For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,    But send him back.
Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay    In Brittany, received intelligence    That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,    That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,    His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,    Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,    Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,    All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne    With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,    Are making hither with all due expedience    And shortly mean to touch our northern shore:    Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay    The first departing of the king for Ireland.    If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,    Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,    Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,    Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt    And make high majesty look like itself,    Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;    But if you faint, as fearing to do so,    Stay and be secret, and myself will go.
That's true enough;Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
Pray you come in.I will bestow you where you shall have timeTo speak your bosom freely.
We still have known thee for a holy man. Wheres Romeos man? What can he say in this?
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
[Aside]  Must thou needs stand for a villain inthine own work? wilt thou whip thine own faults inother men? Do so, I have gold for thee.
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,    Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.    There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here    To make the blessèd period of this peace.
I gave him no order. I gave him the stuff.
I know him not, but I have heard of him:A merchant of incomparable wealth.
I would I could not think it: that thought isbounty's foe;Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
Did he write this?
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting. It is a most sharp sauce.
Yes, sir, I shall.
[Approaches the tomb]    Romeo!    Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains    The stony entrance of the sepulcher?    What mean these masterless and gory swords    To lie discolored by this place of peace?    [Looks inside the tomb]    Romeo! O, pale!Who else? What, Paris too?    And steeped in blood?Ah, what an unkind hour    Is guilty of this lamentable chance!    The lady stirs.
Adieu.
I am as mad as he, If sad and merry madness equal be.
Come on then. Down, and swear.
Fore heaven, an excellent song.
True, when avoided grace makes destiny. My babes were destined to a fairer deathIf grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.
Teach not thy lip such scorn, for it were made    For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.    If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,    Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword,    Which if thou please to hide in this true breast    And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,    I lay it naked to the deadly stroke    And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
For mine own part, no offence to the general nor any man of quality, I hope to be saved.
I say, by sorcery he got this isle.    From me he got it.   If thy greatness will    Revenge it on himfor I know thou darest,    But this thing dare not
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham!
What! lack I credit?
Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,And I would call it fair play.
Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know    Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants.    Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,    And happily we might be interrupted.
By this good light, this is a very shallow monster. I afeard of him! A very weak monster. The man i' th' moon!A most poor credulous monster.   Well drawn, monster, in good sooth!
Pray God, he keep his oath!
This cannot be but a great courtier.
I warrant you, sir,The white cold virgin snow upon my heartAbates the ardor of my liver.
Here is his cave.    Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon!    Look out, and speak to friends:   the Athenians,    By two of their most reverend senate, greet thee:    Speak to them, noble Timon.
What, man, tis a night of revels! The gallants desire it.
Am I not wise?
What mean you by that saying?
O miserable lady! But, for me,    What case stand I in?   I must be the poisoner    Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't    Is the obedience to a master, one    Who in rebellion with himself will have    All that are his so too.   To do this deed,    Promotion follows.   If I could find example    Of thousands that had struck anointed kings    And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't;   but since    Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,    Let villany itself forswear't.   I must    Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain    To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!    Here comes Bohemia.
So much the more our carver's excellence;Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes herAs she lived now.
I should think so: he hath sent me an earnest    inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me    to put off;   but he hath conjured me beyond them, and    I must needs appear.
No.
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?And little Ned Plantagenet his son?
And yet but justice; for thoughThis king were great, his greatness was no guardTo bar heaven's shaft, but sin had his reward.
Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutios friend.His fault concludes but what the law should end,The life of Tybalt.
Mi perdonato,    gentle master mine.    I am in all affected as yourself,    Glad that you thus continue your resolve    To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.    Only, good master, while we do admire    This virtue and this moral discipline,    Lets be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray,    Or so devote to Aristotles checks    As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured.    Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,    And practice rhetoric in your common talk;    Music and poesy use to quicken you;    The mathematics and the metaphysics    Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.    No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en.    In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds.    Breathe Merriman, the poor cur is embossed,    And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach.    Sawst thou not, boy, how Silver made it good    At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault?    I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
Your lieutenant, if you list. Hes no standard.
I would exult, man. You know, he brought me out o' favor with my lady about a bear-baiting here.
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes, So was I bid report here to the stateBy Signior Angelo.
'Tis but so, I warrant.
What meanest thou by that, Malvolio?
O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed!    How fine my master is!   I am afraid    He will chastise me.
Well aimed of such a young one.
We will go walk a little in the orchard, And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
So I do, madonna. But to read his right wits is to readthus.Therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.
I will return again into the house and desire some conduct of the lady.   I am no fighter.   I have heard of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others, to taste their valor. Belike this is a man of that quirk.
My liberty.
Your bedchamber.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,    Or I shall faint. A plague o both your houses!    They have made worms meat of me. I have it,    And soundly too. Your houses!
Rise up, good aunt.
Not I; 'twas Chiron and Demetrius:They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue;And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.
[to ANTONIO]  He will be talking.
A blank, my lord. She never told her love,    But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud,    Feed on her damask cheek.   She pined in thought,    And with a green and yellow melancholy    She sat like patience on a monument,    Smiling at grief.   Was not this love indeed?    We men may say more, swear more, but indeed    Our shows are more than will,   for still we prove    Much in our vows, but little in our love.
[as VINCENTIO]  Keep your hundred pounds to yourself. Heshall need none so long as I live.
How now, what news?
[reads]  The sleeves curiously cut.
The Emperor of Russia was my father:O that he were alive, and here beholdingHis daughter's trial! that he did but seeThe flatness of my misery, yet with eyesOf pity, not revenge!
Thaliard,    You are of our chamber, and our mind partakes    Her private actions to your secrecy;    And for your faithfulness we will advance you.    Thaliard, behold, here's poison, and here's gold;    We hate the prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him:    It fits thee not to ask the reason why,    Because we bid it. Say, is it done?
Too well what love women to men may owe.    In faith, they are as true of heart as we.    My father had a daughter loved a man    As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman,    I should your lordship.
Mark his condition and the event. Then tell meIf this might be a brother.
Down, strumpet!
Thats my good son. But where hast thou been, then?
Heres no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together!
Jove bless thee, master Parson.
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?I had rather be alone.
His discontents are unremoveablyCoupled to nature.
Woe, woe for England! Not a whit for me,    For I, too fond, might have prevented this.    Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm,    And I did scorn it and disdain to fly.    Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble,    And started when he looked upon the Tower,    As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse.    O, now I need the priest that spake to me!    I now repent I told the pursuivant,    As too triumphing, how mine enemies    Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,    And I myself secure in grace and favor.    O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse    Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head.
Thou art rash as fire,To say that she was false. Oh, she was heavenly true!
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where thouhast feigned him a worthy fellow.
By this hand, they are scoundrels and substractors thatsay so of him. Who are they?
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves,And let me be a slave t'achieve that maidWhose sudden sight hath thralled my wounded eye.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Ah, aunt, you wept not for our fathers death.How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
And most chirurgeonly.
How! what does his cashiered worship mutter?
Name them, my lord, let's know them.
Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.
Think not on 't, sir.
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
So much?
What's that?
Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing solely singular.
How now, Lavinia! Marcus, what means this?    Some book there is that she desires to see.    Which is it, girl, of these? Open them, boy.    But thou art deeper read, and better skill'd    Come, and take choice of all my library,    And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens    Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed.    Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.
Receive the blood: and when that they are dead,    Let me go grind their bones to powder small    And with this hateful liquor temper it;    And in that paste let their vile heads be baked.    Come, come, be every one officious    To make this banquet;   which I wish may prove    More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.    So, now bring them in, for I'll play the cook,    And see them ready 'gainst their mother comes.
Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow,That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;    And spur thee on with full as many lies    As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear    From sun to sun:   there is my honour's pawn;    Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
Get you to your lord.    I cannot love him. Let him send no more    Unless perchance you come to me again    To tell me how he takes it.   Fare you well.    I thank you for your pains. Spend this for me.
That thou hast wrongèd in the time o'erpast;    For I myself have many tears to wash    Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee.    The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered,    Ungoverned youth, to wail it in their age;    The parents live whose children thou hast butchered,    Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.    Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast    Misused ere used, by times ill-used o'erpast.
[sings]    What is love? 'Tis not hereafter.    Present mirth hath present laughter.    Whats to come is still unsure.    In delay there lies no plenty.    Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty.    Youths a stuff will not endure.
Then be it so, and go we to determine    Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.    Madam, and you, my sister, will you go    To give your censures in this business?
Amen!
Ay, theres the villany.
I beseech your honour, one piece for me.
Away, Tybalt.
One, sir, that for his love dares yet do moreThan you have heard him brag to you he will.
Most noble lord,Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.
Once more, Cesario,    Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty.    Tell her my love, more noble than the world,    Prizes not quantity of dirty lands;    The parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her,    Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune;    But tis that miracle and queen of gems    That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
[Aside]  But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
Marvelous sweet music!
'Tis more than you deserve; But since you teach me how to flatter you,Imagine I have said farewell already.
So long could IStand by, a looker on.
Welcome, my lord what is the news?
They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,When I do see the very book indeedWhere all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me the glass, and therein will I read.    No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck    So many blows upon this face of mine,    And made no deeper wounds?   O flattering glass,    Like to my followers in prosperity,    Thou dost beguile me!   Was this face the face    That every day under his household roof    Did keep ten thousand men?   was this the face    That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?    Was this the face that faced so many follies,    And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?    A brittle glory shineth in this face:    As brittle as the glory is the face;
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
For love of her that's gone,Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.
For your broken shin.
A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart,For showing me again the eyes of man!
I swear to do this, though a present death    Had been more merciful.   Come on, poor babe:    Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens    To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say    Casting their savageness aside have done    Like offices of pity.   Sir, be prosperous    In more than this deed does require!   And blessing    Against this cruelty fight on thy side,    Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!
Well, give her that ring and therewithal    This letter. That's her chamber.   Tell my lady    I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.    Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,    Where thou shalt find me, sad and solitary.
I cannot tarry. I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit,and so may you, sir.   And so adieu, sir.   My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Lukes to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.
What art thou there? speak.
This cannot be,    By no assay of reason. 'Tis a pageant,    To keep us in false gaze.   When we consider    Th' importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,    And let ourselves again but understand    That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes    So may he with more facile question bear it,    For that it stands not in such warlike brace    But altogether lacks th' abilities    That Rhodes is dressed in.   If we make thought of this    We must not think the Turk is so unskillful    To leave that latest which concerns him first,    Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain    To wake and wage a danger profitless.
So stood the state when Henry the SixthWas crowned in Paris but at nine months old.
I know not, sir.
What, man, tis not so much, tis not so much.    Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,    Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,    Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.
The knave counterfeits well. A good knave.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.    But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter.    Now is the day we long have lookèd for.    I am your neighbor, and was suitor first.
If judgement lie in them, then so do we,Because we ever have been near the king.
You do mistake me, sir.
God grant him health. Did you confer with him?
It would become me    As well as it does you,   and I should do it    With much more ease, for my good will is to it    And yours it is against.
Not by his breath that is more miserable.    Thou art a slave, whom Fortune's tender arm    With favour never clasp'd; but bred a dog.    Hadst thou, like us from our first swath, proceeded    The sweet degrees that this brief world affords    To such as may the passive drugs of it    Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged thyself    In general riot; melted down thy youth    In different beds of lust;   and never learn'd    The icy precepts of respect, but follow'd    The sugar'd game before thee.   But myself,    Who had the world as my confectionary,    The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of men    At duty, more than I could frame employment,    That numberless upon me stuck as leaves    Do on the oak, hive with one winter's brush    Fell from their boughs and left me open, bare    For every storm that blows:   I, to bear this,    That never knew but better, is some burden:    Thy nature did commence in sufferance, time    Hath made thee hard in't. Why shouldst thou hate men?    They never flatter'd thee: what hast thou given?    If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,    Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff    To some she beggar and compounded thee    Poor rogue hereditary.   Hence, be gone!    If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,    Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.
Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!
If traffic do it, the gods do it.
My noble lord,
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
Here's mine.
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.    Obey the bride, you that attend on her.    Go to the feast, revel and domineer,    Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,    Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves.    But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.    Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;    I will be master of what is mine own.    She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,    My household stuff, my field, my barn,    My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything.    And here she stands, touch her whoever dare.    Ill bring mine action on the proudest he    That stops my way in Padua.   Grumio,    Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves.    Rescue thy mistress if thou be a man.    Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate.    Ill buckler thee against a million.
Good fool, for my brothers death.
[to RICHARD]    Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow!    Think how thou stabbedst me in my prime of youth    At Tewkesbury. Despair therefore, and die!     [to RICHMOND]     Be cheerful, Richmond, for the wrongèd souls    Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf.    King Henrys issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
Pardon, master.I will be correspondent to commandAnd do my spiriting gently.
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!    I must be answer'd.   Dost thou hear, Camillo,    I conjure thee, by all the parts of man    Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least    Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare    What incidency thou dost guess of harm    Is creeping toward me;   how far off, how near;    Which way to be prevented, if to be;    If not, how best to bear it.
I am a poor fellow, sir.  [Aside]  I know ye well enough.
[calling offstage]  Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to countenance my mistress.
By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper, and light, and convey what I will set down to my lady.   It shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.
We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester    Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship,    And all the household servants fled with him    To Bolingbroke.
Near! why then, another time I'll hear thee:I prithee, let's be provided to show thementertainment.
You are a fool. Go to.
How now, Roderigo!
We can: my royal liege,He is not guilty of her coming hither.
Do not desire to see this letter.
Ha, come and bring away the nets!
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,    And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth:    A dearer merit, not so deep a maim    As to be cast forth in the common air,    Have I deserved at your highness' hands.    The language I have learn'd these forty years,    My native English, now I must forego:    And now my tongue's use is to me no more    Than an unstringed viol or a harp,    Or like a cunning instrument cased up,    Or, being open, put into his hands    That knows no touch to tune the harmony:    Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,    Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;    And dull unfeeling barren ignorance    Is made my gaoler to attend on me.    I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,    Too far in years to be a pupil now:    What is thy sentence then but speechless death,    Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
Doubt not that, if money and the season can yieldit.
I will help you to t. But tell me true, are you not mad indeed? Or do you but counterfeit?
And I can cut the mutton to t.
A sick man in sadness makes his will,A word ill urged to one that is so ill. In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
I am so far already in your gifts,
Brother, good day. What means this armèd guardThat waits upon your Grace?
I left no ring with her. What means this lady?    Fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her!    She made good view of me, indeed so much    That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue,    For she did speak in starts distractedly.    She loves me, sure! The cunning of her passion    Invites me in this churlish messenger.    None of my lords ring? Why, he sent her none.    I am the man.   If it be so, as tis,    Poor lady, she were better love a dream.    Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness,    Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.    How easy is it for the proper false    In womens waxen hearts to set their forms!    Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we,    For such as we are made of, such we be.    How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,    And I, poor monster, fond as much on him,    And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.    What will become of this? As I am man,    My state is desperate for my masters love.    As I am woman, now, alas the day,    What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe!    O time, thou must untangle this, not I.    It is too hard a knot for me to untie!
Come, come, he must not.Mark our contract.
Ay, you are honest men.
Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.
I was adored once too.
How? Turn thy back and run?
Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,And awful rule, and right supremacy,And, to be short, what not thats sweet and happy?
He, woman. I say thy husbanddost understand the word?My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
Why, this is excellent.
With all my heart, gentlemen both; and how fare you?
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.
Please you, my lord, that honourable    gentleman, Lord Lucullus, entreats your company    to-morrow to hunt with him,   and has sent your honour    two brace of greyhounds.
Ha!
And we mean well in going to this mask,But tis no wit to go.
That it would please you leave these sad designs    To him that hath more cause to be a mourner,    And presently repair to Crosby House,    Where, after I have solemnly interred    At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king    And wet his grave with my repentant tears,    I will with all expedient duty see you.    For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,    Grant me this boon.
Prithee, Kate, lets stand aside and see the end of this controversy.
Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude    The new-healed wound of malice should break out,    Which would be so much the more dangerous    By how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned.    Where every horse bears his commanding rein    And may direct his course as please himself,    As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,    In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
The what?
Go thou away:I'll follow instantly.
I speak not to thee.
All men but Proteus.
What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?
Sir Toby Belch! How now, Sir Toby Belch!
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,Whose duty is deceiveable and false.
First, sir, I pray,What is your title?
Look not pale, Bianca. Thy father will not frown.
My fathers death
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.You whoreson villain! Will you let it fall?  Strikes him
Ay, an it like your good worship.
The king hath on him such a countenance    As he had lost some province and a region    Loved as he loves himself:   even now I met him    With customary compliment;   when he,    Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling    A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and    So leaves me to consider what is breeding    That changeth thus his manners.
Who, Monsieur Veroles?
This was a goodly person,Till the disaster that, one mortal night,Drove him to this.
That, by killing of villains,    Thou wast born to conquer my country.    Put up thy gold: go on,here's gold,go on;    Be as a planetary plague, when Jove    Will o'er some high-viced city hang his poison    In the sick air:   let not thy sword skip one:    Pity not honour'd age for his white beard;    He is an usurer: strike me the counterfeit matron;    It is her habit only that is honest,    Herself's a bawd:   let not the virgin's cheek    Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk-paps,    That through the window-bars bore at men's eyes,    Are not within the leaf of pity writ,    But set them down horrible traitors:   spare not the babe,    Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;    Think it a bastard, whom the oracle    Hath doubtfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,    And mince it sans remorse:     swear against objects;    Put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes;    Whose proof, nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,    Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,    Shall pierce a jot.   There's gold to pay soldiers:    Make large confusion; and, thy fury spent,    Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.
Marry, and did. But if you be remembered,    I did not bid you mar it to the time.    Go, hop me over every kennel home,    For you shall hop without my custom, sir.    Ill none of it. Hence, make your best of it.
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
I am very sorry that you are not well.
You sad Andronici, have done with woes:Give sentence on this execrable wretch,That hath been breeder of these dire events.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
[to RICHMOND]  Awake, and think our wrongs in Richards bosomWill conquer him! Awake, and win the day.
A dish that I do love to feed upon.
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself    To have a worthy feeding: but I have it    Upon his own report and I believe it;    He looks like sooth.   He says he loves my daughter:    I think so too; for never gazed the moon    Upon the water as he'll stand and read    As 'twere my daughter's eyes:   and, to be plain.    I think there is not half a kiss to choose    Who loves another best.
Patience, good sir.
Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Now, by Saint Paul, that news is bad indeed.    O, he hath kept an evil diet long,    And overmuch consumed his royal person.    'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.    Where is he, in his bed?
What, thou?
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong windwill blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.
[aside]   Wit, an t be thy will, put me into good fooling!   Those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft prove fools.   And I, that am sure I lack thee, may pass for a wise man. For what says Quinapalus?   Better awitty fool, than a foolish wit.
And now I remember, my lord, you gaveGood words the other day of a bay courserI rode on: it is yours, because you liked it.
Good heart, and i faith, I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
What is t oclock?
Too light for such a swain as you to catch,And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
O murd'rous slave! O villain!
Ill not meddle with it. It makes a man a coward: a mancannot steal but it accuseth him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his neighbors wife but it detects him.   'Tis a blushing, shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a mans bosom. It fills a man full of obstacles.   It made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance I found. It beggars any man that keeps it.   It is turned out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing, and every man that means to live well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.
Business, my lord! I think most understandBohemia stays here longer.
Your lordship speaks your pleasure.
Yet he would be king on t.
Dexterously, good madonna.
Claribel.
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,    A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave    Edward and York. Then haply she will weep.    Therefore present to heras sometime Margaret    Did to thy father, steeped in Rutlands blood    A handkerchief, which say to her did drain    The purple sap from her sweet brothers body,    And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.    If this inducement move her not to love,    Send her a letter of thy noble deeds;    Tell her thou madst away her uncle Clarence,    Her uncle Rivers, ay, and for her sake    Madst quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
Ha, ha, ha!
What!
I yield all this;But for some other reasons, my grave sir,Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaintMy father of this business.
Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent    When theirs are dry, for Romeos banishment.    Take up those cords.Poor ropes, you are beguiled,    Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.    He made you for a highway to my bed,    But I, a maid, die maiden-widowèd.    Come, cords.Come, Nurse. Ill to my wedding bed.    And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
He is not yet arrived. Nor know I aughtBut that hes well and will be shortly here.
Tut, I have work enough for you to do.Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine!
'Tis very good. I must be circumstanced.
Tell her the king, that may command, entreats
My gracious sovereign.
Of honorable reckoning are you both.    And pity tis you lived at odds so long.    But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
To cart her, rather. Shes too rough for me.There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
Good madam, hear me speak,    And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come    Taint the condition of this present hour,    Which I have wonderd at.   In hope it shall not,    Most freely I confess, myself and Toby    Set this device against Malvolio here,    Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts    We had conceived against him.   Maria writ    The letter at Sir Tobys great importance,    In recompense whereof he hath married her.    How with a sportful malice it was followed,    May rather pluck on laughter than revenge,    If that the injuries be justly weighed    That have on both sides passed.
Must I do so? and must I ravel out    My weaved-up folly?   Gentle Northumberland,    If thy offences were upon record,    Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop    To read a lecture of them?   If thou wouldst,    There shouldst thou find one heinous article,    Containing the deposing of a king    And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,    Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven:    Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,    Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,    Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands    Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates    Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,    And water cannot wash away your sin  .
Why, heres no crab, and therefore look not sour.
Miranda. O my father,I have broke your hest to say so!
Nay, Ill conjure too!    Romeo! Humours, madman, passion, lover!    Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh!    Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied.    Cry but Ay me! Pronounce but love and dove.    Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,    One nickname for her purblind son and heir,    Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so true    When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.    He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.    The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.    I conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes,    By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,    By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,    And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,    That in thy likeness thou appear to us.
[To CASSIO]  What are you here that cry so grievously?
You do yourselvesMuch wrong, you bate too much of your own merits:Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.
Will you sup there?
(  aside  ) What dish o' poison has she dressed him!
Well, you have made a simple choice. You know not how to choose a man. Romeo!   No, not he, though his face be better than any mans, yet his leg excels all mens, andfor a hand and a foot and a body, though they be not tobe talked on, yet they are past compare.   He is not the flower of courtesy, but, Ill warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at home?
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
Oh, he is even in my mistress case,    Just in her case. O woeful sympathy,    Piteous predicament!   Even so lies she,    Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.    Stand up, stand up. Stand, an you be a man.    For Juliets sake, for her sake, rise and stand.    Why should you fall into so deep an O?
You are a senator!
Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon    the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,    forty thousand fathom above water,   and sung this    ballad against the hard hearts of maids:   it was    thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold    fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that    loved her:   the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.
Madam, I am not well.
Stay, I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.
Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather, my mistress.
Ill news, by 'r Lady. Seldom comes the better. I fear, I fear, twill prove a giddy world.
Name it, fair cousin.
A thousand times the worse to want thy light.    Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,    But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to ina month.
Am I made?
Do we, my lord?
How! how!
But the rarity of it iswhich is indeed almost beyond credit
[From within]  Madam!
How!Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,I charged thee that she should not come about me:I knew she would.
O, let me speak!
[Aside]  How like a dream is this I see and hear!Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
Dispatch, I prithee.
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!
A plague upon this howling! They are louder than the weather or our office.
Whose death indeed's the strongest in our censure:    And knowing this kingdom is without a head,    Like goodly buildings left without a roof    Soon fall to ruin,   your noble self,    That best know how to rule and how to reign,    We thus submit unto,   our sovereign.
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if it touch not you it comes near nobody.
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,    What torch is yond that vainly lends his light    To grubs and eyeless skulls?   As I discern,    It burneth in the Capels monument.
I know thee well. How dost thou, my good fellow?
I do believe itAgainst an oracle.
Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
[aside]  Pray God defend me! A little thing would make me tell them how much I lack of a man.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
[sings]      No more dams Ill make for fish,    Nor fetch in firing    At requiring,    Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish.    'Ban, 'Ban, Ca-Caliban    Has a new master. Get a new man.    Freedom, high-day! High-day, freedom! Freedom, high-day, freedom!
'Tis far off,    And rather like a dream than an assurance    That my remembrance warrants.   Had I not    Four or five women once that tended me?
Dost thou mock me?
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the kings fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
Heres goodly gear.
Hail, madam, and my queen!
It shall not die.
Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am shent forspeaking to you.
Sir, I bade them take away you.
[as LUCENTIO]  But say, what to thine old news?
Who does beguile you? Who does do you wrong?
Men judge by the complexion of the sky    The state and inclination of the day:    So may you by my dull and heavy eye,    My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.    I play the torturer, by small and small    To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:    Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke,    And all your northern castles yielded up,    And all your southern gentlemen in arms    Upon his party.
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
Thou hast said enough.    Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth    Of that sweet way I was in to despair!    What say you now? what comfort have we now?    By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly    That bids me be of comfort any more.    Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away;    A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.    That power I have, discharge; and let them go    To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,    For I have none:   let no man speak again    To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
An you re us and fa us, you note us.
Hag-seed, hence!    Fetch us in fuel. And be quick, thou 'rt best,    To answer other business. Shrugst thou, malice?    If thou neglectst or dost unwillingly    What I command, Ill rack thee with old cramps,    Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar    That beasts shall tremble at thy din.
We were never so much out of creatures.   We have but    poor three, and they can do no more than they can    do;   and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.
It likes me well.   Cambio, hie you home,    And bid Bianca make her ready straight.    And, if you will, tell what hath happenèd:    Lucentios father is arrived in Padua,    And how shes like to be Lucentios wife.
Ay, if your selfs remembrance wrong yourself.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,    Though, I confess, much like the character.    But out of question, tis Marias hand.    And now I do bethink me, it was she    First told me thou wast mad, then camest in smiling,    And in such forms which here were presupposed    Upon thee in the letter.   Prithee, be content.    This practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee;    But when we know the grounds and authors of it,    Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge    Of thine own cause.
And whats he then that says I play the villain?    When this advice is free I give and honest,    Probal to thinking and indeed the course    To win the Moor again?   For tis most easy    Th' inclining Desdemona to subdue    In any honest suit. Shes framed as fruitful    As the free elements.   And then for her    To win the Moor, were to renounce his baptism,    All seals and symbols of redeemèd sin,    His soul is so enfettered to her love,    That she may make, unmake, do what she list,    Even as her appetite shall play the god    With his weak function. How am I then a villain    To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,    Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!    When devils will the blackest sins put on    They do suggest at first with heavenly shows    As I do now.   For whiles this honest fool    Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune    And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,    Ill pour this pestilence into his ear:    That she repeals him for her bodys lust.    And by how much she strives to do him good    She shall undo her credit with the Moor.    So will I turn her virtue into pitch    And out of her own goodness make the net    That shall enmesh them all.
We are near Tarsus.
Where is kind Hastings?
Camillo has betray'd me;Whose honour and whose honesty till nowEndured all weathers.
Would they else be content to die?
So indeed I did.
I dare not know, my lord.
No, my dearest love,I would not for the world.
Thou art a grave and noble counsellor,    Most wise in general:   tell me, if thou canst,    What this maid is, or what is like to be,    That thus hath made me weep?
All that is spoke is marred.
Farewell, my lord: securely I espyVirtue with valour couched in thine eye.Order the trial, marshal, and begin.
A man, as you are.
Upon the stroke of ten.
Besides, our nearness to the king in loveIs near the hate of those love not the king.
Here comes the Duke of York.
I would thou hadst my bones and I thy news.Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good Nurse, speak.
Hear me a word,For I shall never speak to thee again.
Gremio, tis now no time to vent our love.    Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,    Ill tell you news indifferent good for either.    [presenting  PETRUCHIO  ]    Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,    Upon agreement from us to his liking,    Will undertake to woo curst Katherine,    Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
Here.
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;    Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,    Grows strong and great in substance and in power.
Why, stay and hear me speak.
My lord, whoever journeys to the prince,    For Gods sake let not us two at home.    For by the way Ill sort occasion,    As index to the story we late talked of,    To part the queens proud kindred from the prince.
[To ANTONIO]  When came he to this town?
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Who have we here?  [Seeing AUTOLYCUS]  We'll make an instrument of this, omitNothing may give us aid.
No, I'll not rearAnother's issue.
No, I pray you;I'll not bereave you of your servant.
It shall be possible. Swear by this swordThou wilt perform my bidding.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
Will you come to bed, my lord?
Good counsel, marry. Learn it, learn it, marquess.
Very like. One of themIs a plain fish, and no doubt marketable.
You are too senseless obstinate, my lord,    Too ceremonious and traditional.    Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,    You break not sanctuary in seizing him.    The benefit thereof is always granted    To those whose dealings have deserved the place    And those who have the wit to claim the place.    This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it    And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.    Then taking him from thence that is not there,    You break no privilege nor charter there.    Oft have I heard of sanctuary men,    But sanctuary children, ne'er till now.
How can that be?
Long live Gonzalo!
Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me!
I have.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word,As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.Have at thee, coward!
O heavens, can you hear a good man groan,    And not relent, or not compassion him?    Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy,    That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart    Than foemen's marks upon his batter'd shield;    But yet so just that he will not revenge.    Revenge, ye heavens, for old Andronicus!
This is the matter.Nurse, give leave awhile,    We must talk in secret.   Nurse, come back again.    I have remembered me. Thous hear our counsel.    Thou knowst my daughters of a pretty age.
(  aside  ) Her Cs, her Us and her Ts. Why that?
Lo, where he comes!
What says she to my face?
Oh, she knew well    Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.    But come, young waverer, come, go with me,    In one respect Ill thy assistant be,    For this alliance may so happy prove    To turn your households rancor to pure love.
Thats a certain text.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Do, do. We steal by line and level, an t like your grace.
Art not a poet?
I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.
Should you do so, my lord,    My speech should fall into such vile success    Which my thoughts aimed not at.   Cassios my worthy friend    My lord, I see youre moved.
And this.
Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought with the men, I will be civil with the maids. I will cut off their heads.
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
These are my ministers, and come with me.
Yet ask.
Cassio did top her, ask thy husband else.    Oh, I were damned beneath all depth in hell,    But that I did proceed upon just grounds    To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
Ay, of my pigeons, sir; nothing else.
Come, swear it, damn thyself.    Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves    Should fear to seize thee.   Therefore be double damned,    Swear thou art honest!
A joint stool.
Fool, I say!
Ay,    If money were as certain as your waiting,    'Twere sure enough.    Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills,    When your false masters eat of my lord's meat?    Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts    And take down the interest into their    gluttonous maws.    You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up;    Let me pass quietly:    Believe 't, my lord and I have made an end;    I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
Widow! A pox o' that! How came that widow in? Widow Dido!
Calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet gown, having come from a daybed, where I have left Olivia sleeping
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.
Why then, he is alive.
Your wife, my lord. Your true and loyal wife.
My lord.
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!    Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again;    Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,    But makes one pardon strong.
Why, so, brave lords! when we join in league,    I am a lamb: but if you brave the Moor,    The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,    The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.    But say, again; how many saw the child?
My Lord
That time serves still.
It is in mine authority to commandThe keys of all the posterns: please your highnessTo take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.
That's the least fear; for, by the semblanceOf their white flags display'd, they bring us peace,And come to us as favourers, not as foes.
[as LUCENTIO]  Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free For me as for you?
And what of him?
Let me be taen. Let me be put to death.    I am content, so thou wilt have it so.    Ill say yon grey is not the mornings eye.    Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthias brow.    Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat    The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.    I have more care to stay than will to go.    Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.    How is t, my soul? Lets talk. It is not day.
I'll draw the curtain:My lord's almost so far transported thatHe'll think anon it lives.
Nay, but hear me.
All leave us else; but let your cares o'erlookWhat shipping and what lading's in our haven,And then return to us.  [Exeunt Lords]  Helicanus, thouHast moved us: what seest thou in our looks?
If I did think, sir, I were well awake,    Id strive to tell you.   We were dead of sleep    Andhow, we know notall clapped under hatches,    Where but even now with strange and several noises    Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,    And more diversity of sounds, all horrible,    We were awaked, straightway at liberty,    Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld    Our royal, good, and gallant ship,   our Master    Capering to eye her. On a trice, so please you,    Even in a dream were we divided from them    And were brought moping hither.
Whats the matter, think you?
[aside]  Fair encounterOf two most rare affections! Heavens rain graceOn that which breeds between 'em!
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest    thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?    hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?    receives not thy nose court-odor from me?   reflect I    not on thy baseness court-contempt?   Thinkest thou,    for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy    business, I am therefore no courtier?   I am courtier    cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck    back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to    open thy affair.
No more of drowning, do you hear?
Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.
I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs;I have drawn her picture with my voice.
'Faith, they listened to me as they would have    hearkened to their father's testament.   There was a    Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he went to bed to    her very description.
If thou more murmurst, I will rend an oak    And peg thee in his knotty entrails   till    Thou hast howled away twelve winters.
Carthage?
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,    My women may be with me; for you see    My plight requires it.   Do not weep, good fools;    There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress    Has deserved prison, then abound in tears    As I come out: this action I now go on    Is for my better grace.   Adieu, my lord:    I never wish'd to see you sorry; now    I trust I shall.   My women, come; you have leave.
If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Do so, my friends. See them well entertain'd.
Pitchers have ears.
My lord, for aught I know.
Out!A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:A most intelligencing bawd!
And stay, good Nurse. Behind the abbey wall    Within this hour my man shall be with thee    And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,    Which to the high top-gallant of my joy    Must be my convoy in the secret night.    Farewell. Be trusty, and Ill quit thy pains.    Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find theinclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
[standing]  Amen.  [aside]  And make me die a good old man! That is the butt end of a mothers blessing;I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.
See, brother, see; note how she quotes the leaves.
Ay, Apemantus.
How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?
O, ay, Curtis, ay, and therefore fire, fire. Cast on nowater.
Iago? Oh, I am spoiled, undone by villains!Give me some help.
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,    Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts    How I might stop this tempest ere it came;    And finding little comfort to relieve them,    I thought it princely charity to grieve them.
The princes both make high account of you  [aside]  For they account his head upon the Bridge.
With all my heartI pardon him.
Such a house broke!    So noble a master fall'n! All gone!   and not    One friend to take his fortune by the arm,    And go along with him!
That if one break, the other will hold.   Or, if both break, your gaskins fall.
She is alive; behold,    Her eyelids, cases to those heavenly jewels    Which Pericles hath lost,    Begin to part their fringes of bright gold;    The diamonds of a most praised water    Do appear, to make the world twice rich.   Live,    And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,    Rare as you seem to be.
So may you lose your arms.If you strike me, you are no gentleman;And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
[Aside]   This is that banished haughty Montague,    That murdered my loves cousin, with which grief,    It is supposed the fair creature died.    And here is come to do some villainous shame    To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.    [To ROMEO]   Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!    Can vengeance be pursued further than death?    Condemnèd villain, I do apprehend thee.    Obey and go with me, for thou must die.
Foul devil, for Gods sake, hence, and trouble us not,    For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,    Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.    If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,    Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
I do follow here in the chase not like a hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is almostspent, I have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled, and I think the issue will be I shall have so much experience for my pains.   And so, with no money at all and a little more wit, return again to Venice.
How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?    Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts;    For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.    And cannot say, you dare not.   Good Camillo,    Your changed complexions are to me a mirror    Which shows me mine changed too;   for I must be    A party in this alteration, finding    Myself thus alter'd with 't.
Whence came you, sir?
Sweet love, I see, changing his property,    Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:    Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made    With heads, and not with hands;   those whom you curse    Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound    And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,    But none returns   . For us to levy power    Proportionable to the enemy    Is all unpossible.
Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius,And will revolt from me to succor him.
Whose womb unmeasurable, and infinite breast,    Teems, and feeds all;   whose self-same mettle,    Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puff'd,    Engenders the black toad and adder blue,    The gilded newt and eyeless venom'd worm,    With all the abhorred births below crisp heaven    Whereon Hyperion's quickening fire doth shine;    Yield him, who all thy human sons doth hate,    From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!    Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb,    Let it no more bring out ingrateful man!    Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears;    Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face    Hath to the marbled mansion all above    Never presented!   O, a root,dear thanks!    Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas;    Whereof ungrateful man, with liquorish draughts    And morsels unctuous, greases his pure mind,    That from it all consideration slips!
How now? Who has put in?
What, canst not rule her?
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!Thou talkst of nothing.
[to RICHARD]    When I was mortal, my anointed body    By thee was punchèd full of deadly holes.    Think on the Tower and me. Despair, and die!    Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die.     [to RICHMOND]     Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror.    Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king,    Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish.
I am more serious than my custom.   You    Must be so too if heed me, which to do    Trebles thee o'er.
A gentleman of Tyre; my name, Pericles;    My education been in arts and arms;    Who, looking for adventures in the world,    Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men,    And after shipwreck driven upon this shore.
Follow, I pray you.
No, not tonight.
I confess the cape.
I will, my lord, with all convenient haste.
Madam, I am here. What is your will?
Why then, resolve me whether you will or no.
Your lordship ever binds him.
Ill make the motion. Stand here, make a good show on t.    This shall end without the perdition of souls.   [aside]   Marry,    Ill ride your horse as well as I ride you.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
Iago is most honest.    Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest    Let me have speech with you.    Come, my dear love,    The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue:    That profits yet to come tween me and you.    Good night.
Old lord, I cannot blame thee,    Who am myself attached with weariness    To th' dulling of my spirits. Sit down and rest.    Even here I will put off my hope and keep it    No longer for my flatterer.   He is drowned    Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks    Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.
See for the news.
You holy clergymen, is there no plotTo rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
Lend thine ear.
You scorn: believe me, 'twere best I did give o'er.
I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
She is,When once she is my wife.
That I am pretty.
But thou must needs be sure My spirits and my place have in their powerTo make this bitter to thee.
I love thee better now than e'er I did.
Oh, falsely, falsely murdered!
Tedious it were to tell and harsh to hear.  Sufficeth I am come to keep my word, Though in some part enforcèd to digress,Which, at more leisure, I will so excuseAs you shall well be satisfied withal.But where is Kate? I stay too long from her.The morning wears. 'Tis time we were at church.
You are deceived. Your brother Gloucester hates you.
The devil speaks in him.
If without peril it be possible, Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him,And give him from me this most needful note.
Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.This is not Romeo. Hes some other where.
That quaffing and drinking will undo you:   I heard my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.
[to YORK]  Come, come, my boy. We will to sanctuary.Madam, farewell.
[Within]  My liege, beware; look to thyself;Thou hast a traitor in thy presence there.
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;Have you a father?
Faith, none but Humfrey Hower, that called your Grace    To breakfast once, forth of my company.    If I be so disgracious in your eye,    Let me march on and not offend you, madam.    Strike up the drum.
Where I have learned me to repent the sin    Of disobedient opposition    To you and your behests,   and am enjoined    By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here    To beg your pardon.   [Falls to her knees]    Pardon, I beseech you!    Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Why, I'll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, andour king the good Simonides.
She gives it out that you shall marry her.Do you intend it?
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,And yet I would it were to give again.
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.    They do abuse the king that flatter him:    For flattery is the bellows blows up sin;    The thing which is flatter'd, but a spark,    To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing;    Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,    Fits kings, as they are men, for they may err.    When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace,    He flatters you, makes war upon your life.    Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please;    I cannot be much lower than my knees.
Ah, madam, 'tis too true:   and that is worse,    The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,    The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,    With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
Good faith, a little one, not past a pint, As I am a soldier.
Marry, I fare well,For here is cheer enough. Where is my wife?
With an eye of green in t.
Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!Choler does kill me that thou art alive;I swound to see thee.
And to sink in it, should you burthen loveToo great oppression for a tender thing.
I would there were no age between sixteen and    three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the    rest; for there is nothing in the between but    getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,    stealing, fighting   Hark you now! Would any but    these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty    hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my    best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find    than the master:   if any where I have them, 'tis by    the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy    will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very    pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder?   A    pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:    though I am not bookish, yet I can read    waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape.   This has been    some stair-work, some trunk-work, some    behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this    than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for    pity:   yet I'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed    but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!
Why, when, I say?Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry. Off with my boots, you rogues! You villains, when?
Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?
What must be shall be.
Should a villain say so,The most replenish'd villain in the world,He were as much more villain: you, my lord,Do but mistake.
Villainy, villainy, villainy!    I think upon t, I think I smell t, Oh, villainy!    I thought so then, Ill kill myself for grief.    Oh, villainy, villainy!
G   ive me no help in lamentation.    I am not barren to bring forth complaints.    All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,    That I, being governed by the watery moon,    May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world.    Ah, for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!
Confine? Ill confine myself no finer than I am.   These clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too.   An they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
I shall report,For most it caught me, the celestial habits,Methinks I so should term them, and the reverenceOf the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!How ceremonious, solemn and unearthlyIt was i' the offering!
Good night, good night. Heaven me such uses send,Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!
It is in vain that you would speak with Timon;    For he is set so only to himself    That nothing but himself which looks like man    Is friendly with him.
I pray the gods she may, with all my heart!
But Ill be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.Marry, go before to field, hell be your follower.Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Let it go naked, men may see't the better:You that are honest, by being what you are,Make them best seen and known.
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours.    He should, for that, commit your godfathers.    O, belike his majesty hath some intent    That you shall be new christened in the Tower.    But whats the matter, Clarence? May I know?
Her father loved me, oft invited me,    Still questioned me the story of my life    From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,    That I have passed.    I ran it through, even from my boyish days,    To th' very moment that he bade me tell it,    Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances,    Of moving accidents by flood and field,    Of hair-breadth scapes i' th' imminent deadly breach,    Of being taken by the insolent foe    And sold to slavery,   of my redemption thence    And portance in my travelers history.    Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,    Rough quarries, rocks, hills whose heads touch heaven    It was my hint to speaksuch was my process    And of the Cannibals that each others eat,    The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads    Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to hear    Would Desdemona seriously incline.    But still the house affairs would draw her hence,    Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,    Shed come again, and with a greedy ear    Devour up my discourse,   which I, observing,    Took once a pliant hour and found good means    To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart    That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,    Whereof by parcels she had something heard    But not intentively. I did consent,    And often did beguile her of her tears    When I did speak of some distressful stroke    That my youth suffered.   My story being done    She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.    She swore, in faith, twas strange, twas passing strange,    'Twas pitiful, twas wondrous pitiful.    She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished    That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked me    And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,    I should but teach him how to tell my story    And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake.    She loved me for the dangers I had passed,    And I loved her that she did pity them.    This only is the witchcraft I have used.    Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.
He's irremoveable,    Resolved for flight.   Now were I happy, if    His going I could frame to serve my turn,    Save him from danger, do him love and honour,    Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia    And that unhappy king, my master, whom    I so much thirst to see.
[giving the letter to FABIAN]  Read it you, sirrah.
Still live they, and forever let them last.
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.    Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man.    Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.    Let them affright thee.   I beseech thee, youth,    Put not another sin upon my head    By urging me to fury. O, be gone!    By heaven, I love thee better than myself,    For I come hither armed against myself.    Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say    A madmans mercy bid thee run away.
O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies!    Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!    Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man.    What think you: if he were conveyed to bed,    Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,    A most delicious banquet by his bed,    And brave attendants near him when he wakes,    Would not the beggar then forget himself?
Freely, good father.
Now, by my troth, if I had been remembered,I could have given my uncles grace a flout To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.
Right.
Are these thy ministers? what are they call'd?
'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white    Natures own sweet and cunning hand laid on.    Lady, you are the cruelst she alive    If you will lead these graces to the grave    And leave the world no copy.
Then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends.
A challenge, on my life.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness.
Pray, draw near.
Our horses!
Mistress, we have.
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.
And I mine.
[giving him money]  I understand you, sir. 'Tis well begged.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will takethe wall of any man or maid of Montagues.
O Dionyza, such a piece of slaughterThe sun and moon ne'er look'd upon!
Yet
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,    And be it moon, or sun, or what you please.    An if you please to call it a rush candle,    Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee,    Attend our weightier judgment.   And, not to swell    our spirit,    He shall be executed presently.
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view    He may surrender;   so we shall proceed    Without suspicion.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.
Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,    Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,    Kill what I love?   A savage jealousy    That sometimes savors nobly.   But hear me this:    Since you to nonregardance cast my faith,    And that I partly know the instrument    That screws me from my true place in your favor,    Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still.    But this your minion, whom I know you love,    And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,    Him will I tear out of that cruel eye    Where he sits crowned in his masters spite.    [To VIOLA]   Come, boy, with me. My thoughts are ripe inmischief:    Ill sacrifice the lamb that I do love    To spite a ravens heart within a dove.
Scorning advice, read the conclusion then:    Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed,    As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed.
When every grief is entertained thats offered,Comes to th' entertainer
If youll sit down,Ill bear your logs the while. Pray, give me that.Ill carry it to the pile.
I will embrace    Your offer.   Come, dearest madam.   O, no tears,    Lychorida, no tears:    Look to your little mistress, on whose grace    You may depend hereafter.   Come, my lord.
Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast notthere for the goose.
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred wordsOf that tongues uttering, yet I know the sound. Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Didst note it?
Why should calamity be full of words?
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand andwalk: I will even take my leave of you, and pacesoftly towards my kinsman's.
Prosper you, sweet sir!  [Exit Clown]  Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if Imake not this cheat bring out another and theshearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my nameput in the book of virtue!  [Sings]  Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,And merrily hent the stile-a:A merry heart goes all the day,Your sad tires in a mile-a.
Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.
Oh! Oh! Oh!
I do remember me, Henry the Sixth    Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,    When Richmond was a little peevish boy.    A king, perhaps
Is t possible?
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,So stumblest on my counsel?
I have too few to take my leave of you,    When the tongue's office should be prodigal    To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
Alas now, pray you,    Work not so hard. I would the lightning had    Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile!    Pray, set it down and rest you.   When this burns,    'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father    Is hard at study. Pray now, rest yourself.    Hes safe for these three hours.
Dear lad, believe it.    For they shall yet belie thy happy years    That say thou art a man.   Dianas lip    Is not more smooth and rubious. Thy small pipe    Is as the maidens organ, shrill and sound,    And all is semblative a womans part.    I know thy constellation is right apt    For this affair.   [To CURIO and attendants]    Some four or five attend him.    All, if you will, for I myself am best    When least in company.   [To VIOLA]   Prosper well in this,    And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,    To call his fortunes thine.
Thats not so good now.
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then    'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a    wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters    and a dram dead;   then recovered again with    aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as    he is, and in the hottest day prognostication    proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the    sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he    is to behold him with flies blown to death.   But what    talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries    are to be smiled at, their offences being so    capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain    men, what you have to the king:   being something    gently considered, I'll bring you where he is    aboard, tender your persons to his presence,    whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man    besides the king to effect your suits, here is man    shall do it.
Where is that ring, boy?
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash    To be a party in this injury.    Patience awhile, good Cassio.   Come, come,    Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?    Alas, my friend and my dear countryman    Roderigo! Noyes, sure! Yes, tis Roderigo.
Wilt come? Ill follow, Stephano.
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,And, with them, Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
But it becomes me well enough, does t not?
Alas, sir!
This closing with him fits his lunacy    Whate'er I forge to feed his brain-sick fits,    Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,    For now he firmly takes me for Revenge;    And, being credulous in this mad thought,    I'll make him send for Lucius his son;    And, whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,    I'll find some cunning practise out of hand,    To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,    Or, at the least, make them his enemies.    See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.
Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not    wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not    being a tall fellow, trust me not.   Hark! the kings    and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the    queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy    good masters.
How!
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.    Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought    For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,    Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross    Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens:    And toil'd with works of war, retired himself    To Italy; and there at Venice gave    His body to that pleasant country's earth,    And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,    Under whose colours he had fought so long.
Nay, stare not, masters, it is true, indeed.
Is t so, indeed.
But crave! Then I'll turn craver too, and so Ishall 'scape whipping.
Fie, fie upon her! she's able to freeze the god    Priapus, and undo a whole generation.   We must    either get her ravished, or be rid of her.   When she    should do for clients her fitment, and do me the    kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks,    her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her    knees;     that she would make a puritan of the devil,    if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
O, my poor brother! And so perchance may he be.
Come, come, I know 'tis good for you.Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least:Remember what I have said.
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wildfowl?
How poor are they that have not patience!    What wound did ever heal but by degrees?    Thou knowst we work by wit and not by witchcraft,    And wit depends on dilatory time.    Doest not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee.    And thou, by that small hurt, hath cashiered Cassio.    Though other things grow fair against the sun,    Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.    Content thyself awhile. In troth, tis morning.    Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.    Retire thee, go where thou art billeted.    Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter.    Nay, get thee gone.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see.She has deceived her father, and may thee.
[aside]  How now, Roderigo?I pray you, after the lieutenant, go!
Why to give over, I pray you? is it a shame to getwhen we are old?
A hundred then.
Yet I beseech you,    If you think fit, or that it may be done,    Give me advantage of some brief discourse    With Desdemona alone.
Where's Bohemia? speak.
(  aside  ) Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
Faith, as cold as can be.
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!
Admirable: how this grace    Speaks his own standing!   what a mental power    This eye shoots forth! how big imagination    Moves in this lip! to the dumbness of the gesture    One might interpret.
Then let us both be sudden.
If nothing lets to make us happy both    But this my masculine usurped attire,    Do not embrace me till each circumstance    Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump    That I am Viola.   Which to confirm,    Ill bring you to a captain in this town,    Where lie my maiden weeds, by whose gentle help    I was preserved to serve this noble count.    All the occurrence of my fortune since    Hath been between this lady and this lord.
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
Of that theres none, or little.
Sir Toby, I must be round with you.   My lady bade me tell you, that, though she harbors you as her kinsman, shes nothing allied to your disorders.   If you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you are welcometo the house. If not, an it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.
There, Hastings, I will never more rememberOur former hatred, so thrive I and mine.
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind    To help him to his grave immediately!    The lining of his coffers shall make coats    To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.    Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him:    Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!
Ay.
You speak too bitterly.
Know, my loving lord,The marquess Dorset, as I hear, is fled To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.
Good night.Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Would thou wouldst burst!
Why, what is Tybalt?
Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my lady.Make your excuse wisely, you were best.
Ay, with a heart as willingAs bondage e'er of freedom. Heres my hand.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence cell,And gave him what becomèd love I might, Not stepping oer the bounds of modesty.
Make haste, make haste, sirrah.
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
What black magician conjures up this fiend To stop devoted charitable deeds?
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.    Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,    And turn again.   And she can weep, sir, weep.    And shes obedient, as you say, obedient,    Very obedient.    (To DESDEMONA)    Proceed you in your tears.     (To LODOVICO)    Concerning this, sir    (To DESDEMONA)    Oh,well-painted passion!     (To LODOVICO)    I am commanded home.    (To DESDEMONA)    Get you away,    Ill send for you anon.    (To LODOVICO)    Sir, I obey the mandate    And will return to Venice.    (To DESDEMONA)    Hence, avaunt!
Stanley, he is your wifes son. Well, look unto it.
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,    Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war    My thrice-driven bed of down.   I do agnize    A natural and prompt alacrity    I find in hardness, and do undertake    These present wars against the Ottomites.    Most humbly therefore bending to your state,    I crave fit disposition for my wife.    Due reference of place and exhibition,    With such accommodation and besort    As levels with her breeding.
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.
Either forbear,    Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you    For more amazement.   If you can behold it,    I'll make the statue move indeed, descend    And take you by the hand;   but then you'll think    Which I protest against   I am assisted    By wicked powers.
I think she means that there was more than oneConfederate in the fact: ay, more there was;Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.
By 'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.
Whats that, I pray?
He says he will return incontinent,And hath commanded me to go to bedAnd bid me to dismiss you.
Then give me leave that I may turn the key,That no man enter till my tale be done.
More matter for a May morning.
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes With nimble soles. I have a soul of leadSo stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
But see what heaven can do! By this our change,    These mouths, who but of late, earth, sea, and air,    Were all too little to content and please,    Although they gave their creatures in abundance,    As houses are defiled for want of use,    They are now starved for want of exercise:    Those palates who, not yet two summers younger,    Must have inventions to delight the taste,    Would now be glad of bread, and beg for it:    Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes,    Thought nought too curious, are ready now    To eat those little darlings whom they loved.    So sharp are hunger's teeth, that man and wife    Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life:    Here stands a lord, and there a lady weeping;    Here many sink, yet those which see them fall    Have scarce strength left to give them burial.    Is not this true?
[To TRANIO]  Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,Did you yet ever see Baptistas daughter?
Ay.
When he stands where I am and sees you there.
That dreamers often lie.
For Michael Cassio, I dare be sworn, I think, that he is honest.
Lucius' Servant And Sir Philotus too!
Your griefs! for what? wrong not your prince you love.
Here she lies, sir.
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;Yond crickets shall not hear it.
That he hath usèd thee.
'Tis much.Servants, leave me and her alone.Madam, undress you and come now to bed.
Madam, with all my heart.
Welcome, good brother.What do you think the hour?
[To ROMEO]  Away, begone. The sport is at the best.
I come, anon.But if thou meanst not well,I do beseech thee
There be some such, no question.
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business forus, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as muchmore and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.
Then call them to our presence;     face to face,    And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear    The accuser and the accused freely speak   :    High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire,    In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
Fare you well, gentlemen.  [she starts to exit]
No; that it is too little.
Oh, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is music with her silver sound because musicians have no gold for sounding.    [Sings]  Then music with her silver sound    With speedy help doth lend redress.
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeos hours?
There's never a one of you but trusts a knave,That mightily deceives you.
As well as one so great and so forlornMay hold together: on her frights and griefs,Which never tender lady hath born greater,She is something before her time deliver'd.
What is't, knave?
Go to:    Perchance some single vantages you took.    When my indispos ition put you back:    And that unaptness made your minister,    Thus to excuse yourself.
I' the name of me
Where is gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?
So do I ever  [aside]  being well-advised,For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.
My daughters mother thinks it with her soul.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.    [To the  MERCHANT  ]   Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of.    I pray you stand good father to me now.    Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
I understand thee; thou hadst some means to keep adog.
Well, sir, for want of other idleness, Ill bide your proof.
O sir, content you.    I follow him to serve my turn upon him.    We cannot all be masters, nor all masters    Cannot be truly followed.   You shall mark    Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave    That (doting on his own obsequious bondage)    Wears out his time much like his masters ass    For naught but provender, and when hes old, cashiered.    Whip me such honest knaves.   Others there are    Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,    Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves    And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,    Do well thrive by them.   And when they have lined their coats,    Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,    And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,    It is as sure as you are Roderigo,    Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago.    In following him, I follow but myself.    Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,    But seeming so, for my peculiar end.    For when my outward action doth demonstrate    The native act and figure of my heart    In compliment extern, tis not long after    But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve    For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.
Then cursed she Richard, then cursed she Buckingham.Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God,To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!And for my sister and her princely sons, Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,Which, as thou knowst, unjustly must be spilt.
Ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond,But Ill not trust thee.
You peasant swain! You whoreson malt-horse drudge!Did I not bid thee meet me in the parkAnd bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
No, misery makes sport to mock itself:    Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,    I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
[aside]  Praise in departing.
You may so; 'tis the better for you that your    resorters stand upon sound legs.   How now!    wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal    withal, and defy the surgeon?
Ay, but hell have but a year in all these ducats. Hesa very fool and a prodigal.
I am of your fear for that.
Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch,Thou friend of an ill fashion!
My comfort is that heaven will take our soulsAnd plague injustice with the pains of hell.
I know a discontented gentleman    Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit.    Gold were as good as twenty orators,    And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.
Whats here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?
Publius, how now! how now, my masters!What, have you met with her?
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal    The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,    The time shall not be many hours of age    More than it is ere foul sin gathering head    Shalt break into corruption:   thou shalt think,    Though he divide the realm and give thee half,    It is too little, helping him to all;    And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way    To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,    Being ne'er so little urged, another way    To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.    The love of wicked men converts to fear;    That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both    To worthy danger and deserved death.
O, you say well.
Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,    Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:    The sly slow hours shall not determinate    The dateless limit of thy dear exile;    The hopeless word of 'never to return'    Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.
[to RICHARD]    The last was I that helped thee to the crown;    The last was I that felt thy tyranny.    O, in the battle think on Buckingham,    And die in terror of thy guiltiness.    Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death.    Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath.     [to RICHMOND]    I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid,    But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed.    God and good angels fight on Richmonds side,    And Richard fall in height of all his pride.
O, not by much.
Ay, sir: the other squirrel was stolen from me by    the hangman boys in the market-place:   and then I    offered her mine own, who is a dog as big as ten of    yours,   and therefore the gift the greater.
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Thither will I with you;   for little office    The hateful commons will perform for us,    Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.    Will you go along with us?
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? Whats your will?
I prithee, beat thy drum, and get thee gone.
The blessed gods    Purge all infection from our air whilst you    Do climate here!   You have a holy father,    A graceful gentleman; against whose person,    So sacred as it is, I have done sin:    For which the heavens, taking angry note,    Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,    As he from heaven merits it, with you    Worthy his goodness.   What might I have been,    Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,    Such goodly things as you!
By your leave, sir,
I am strong-framed. He cannot prevail with me.
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.
Lord, quoth he? That a monster should be such a natural!
Still confirmation:    Embrace him, dear Thaisa; this is he.    Now do I long to hear how you were found;    How possibly preserved; and who to thank,    Besides the gods, for this great miracle.
Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas    Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas;    Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep,    And flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep;    Thy banks with pionèd and twillèd brims,    Which spongy April at thy hest betrims    To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy broom groves,    Whose shadow the dismissèd bachelor loves,    Being lass-lorn; thy pole-clipped vineyard;    And thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky hard,    Where thou thyself dost air   the Queen o' th' Sky,    Whose watery arch and messenger am I,    Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,    Here on this grass plot, in this very place,    To come and sport. Her peacocks fly amain.
Master, some show to welcome us to town.
Be not afraid of greatness. 'Twas well writ.
How canst thou try them so?
And yet you halt not.
Thou speak'st like a physician, Helicanus,    That minister'st a potion unto me    That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.    Attend me, then: I went to Antioch,    Where as thou know'st, against the face of death,    I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty.    From whence an issue I might propagate,    Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects.    Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder;    The rest   hark in thine ear   as black as incest:    Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father    Seem'd not to strike, but smooth:     but thou    know'st this,    'Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss.    Such fear so grew in me, I hither fled,    Under the covering of a careful night,    Who seem'd my good protector; and, being here,    Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.    I knew him tyrannous; and tyrants' fears    Decrease not, but grow faster than the years:    And should he doubt it, as no doubt he doth,    That I should open to the listening air    How many worthy princes' bloods were shed,    To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,    To lop that doubt, he'll fill this land with arms,    And make pretence of wrong that I have done him:    When all, for mine, if I may call offence,    Must feel war's blow, who spares not innocence:    Which love to all, of which thyself art one,    Who now reprovest me for it,
[as Sir Topas]  Maintain no words with him, good fellow.  [in   his own voice]  Who, I, sir? Not I, sir. God b' wi' you, good Sir Topas.  [as Sir Topas]  Marry, amen.  [in hisown voice]  I will, sir, I will.
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?
Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.    Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,    I will appeach the villain.
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by thatwhich is left of him what he is, fetch me to thesight of him.
I have t in my nose too.
I speak no treason.
Well, I am standing water.
Am I a lord, and have I such a lady?    Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now?    I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak.    I smell sweet savors and I feel soft things.    Upon my life, I am a lord indeed    And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.    Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,    And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.
Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see t?
'Faith, I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish usof all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests.
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,Shut up in prison, kept without my food,Whipped and tormented andGood een, good fellow.
What is this same?
So do not I. Go, coward as thou art.    Well, Ill go hide the body in some hole    Till that the duke give order for his burial.    And when I have my meed, I will away,    For this will out, and then I must not stay.
Come, come, a hand from either:    Let me be blest to make this happy close;    'Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
I shall accept them fairly; let the presentsBe worthily entertain'd.
And your horse now would make him an ass.
Good or bad news, that thou comst in so bluntly?
Truly, madam, he holds Beelzebub at the staves' end as well as a man in his case may do.   Has here writ a letterto you. I should have given t you today morning, but as a madmans epistles are no gospels, so it skills not much when they are delivered.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
No.
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;    Who hither come engaged by my oath    Which God defend a knight should violate!    Both to defend my loyalty and truth    To God, my king and my succeeding issue,    Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me    And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,    To prove him, in defending of myself,    A traitor to my God, my king, and me:    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,    Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.    Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais    Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers;    The other part reserved I by consent,    For that my sovereign liege was in my debt    Upon remainder of a dear account,    Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:    Now swallow down that lie.     For Gloucester's death,    I slew him not; but to my own disgrace    Neglected my sworn duty in that case.    For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,    The honourable father to my foe    Once did I lay an ambush for your life,    A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul    But ere I last received the sacrament    I did confess it, and exactly begg'd    Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.    This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd,    It issues from the rancour of a villain,    A recreant and most degenerate traitor    Which in myself I boldly will defend;    And interchangeably hurl down my gage    Upon this overweening traitor's foot,    To prove myself a loyal gentleman    Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.    In haste whereof, most heartily I pray    Your highness to assign our trial day.
To take is not to give.
A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue:    Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad    Amongst the fairest breeders of our clime:    The empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,    And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.
Nay, but you will?
The more shame for him that he sends it me;    For I have heard him say a thousand times    His Julia gave it him at his departure.    Though his false finger have profaned the ring,    Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate.Better once than never, for never too late.
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!    Thy fault our law calls death,   but the kind Prince,    Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law,    And turned that black word death to banishment.    This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Why, so he doth, when he delivers youFrom this earths thralldom to the joys of heaven.
Who has done this, Sir Andrew?
Alls well, sweeting,Come away to bed.  [To MONTANO]  Sir, for your hurtsMyself will be your surgeon. Lead him off.
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord
Our hope in him is dead: let us return,And strain what other means is left unto usIn our dear peril.
Good queen, my lord,Good queen; I say good queen;And would by combat make her good, so were IA man, the worst about you.
Please you, sir,    Do not omit the heavy offer of it.    It seldom visits sorrow. When it doth,    It is a comforter.
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life.
She would never tellHer parentage; being demanded that,She would sit still and weep.
[to FERDINAND]  Sweet lord, you play me false.
Say it be, 'tis true.
And, like a traitor to the name of God,Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade Unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereigns son.
What is his name?
This is much credit to you.
My most exquisite Sir Topas!
How now, philosopher!
We wait for certain money here, sir.
See, by good hap, yonder's my lord;I have sweat to see his honour. My honoured lord,
Please you, gentlemen,    The time is unagreeable to this business:    Your importunacy cease till after dinner,    That I may make his lordship understand    Wherefore you are not paid.
If you did know, my lord, my master's wants
Pray heavens he be,    For I have served him, and the man commands    Like a full soldier. Lets to the seaside, ho!    As well to see the vessel thats come in    As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,    Even till we make the main and th' aerial blue    An indistinct regard.
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparelta'en from me, and these detestable things put uponme.
[aside]  That will be never.  [To HORTENSIO]  Tune your instrument.
Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
Temperance was a delicate wench.
Sir Thomas Lovell and Lord Marquess Dorset,    'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.    But this good comfort bring I to your Highness:    The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest.    Richmond, in Dorsetshire, sent out a boat    Unto the shore to ask those on the banks    If they were his assistants, yea or no   Who answered him they came from Buckingham    Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,    Hoisted sail and made his course for Brittany.
Now, by the world
Push! did you see my cap?
If thou beest Prospero,    Give us particulars of thy preservation,    How thou hast met us here,   whom three hours since    Were wracked upon this shore, where I have lost    How sharp the point of this remembrance is!    My dear son Ferdinand.
O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!    Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,    Since riches point to misery and contempt?    Who would be so mock'd with glory? or to live    But in a dream of friendship?    To have his pomp and all what state compounds    But only painted, like his varnish'd friends?    Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,    Undone by goodness! Strange, unusual blood,    When man's worst sin is, he does too much good!    Who, then, dares to be half so kind again?    For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.    My dearest lord, bless'd, to be most accursed,    Rich, only to be wretched, thy great fortunes    Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!    He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat    Of monstrous friends, nor has he with him to    Supply his life, or that which can command it.    I'll follow and inquire him out:    I'll ever serve his mind with my best will;    Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.
Good my liege, I come;    And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess    Myself your loyal servant, your physician,    Your most obedient counsellor,   yet that dare    Less appear so in comforting your evils,    Than such as most seem yours:   I say, I come    From your good queen.
He hath some meaning in his mad attire.We will persuade him, be it possible,To put on better ere he go to church.
Its suppertime, my lord. Its nine o'clock.
What, have you lost your wits?
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.
Good! gramercy.
Peace, you mumbling fool!Utter your gravity oer a gossips bowl, For here we need it not.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the Nurse cursed in thepantry,   and every thing in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you, follow straight.
What! a knave too?
Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true    In this appeal as thou art all unjust;    And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,    To prove it on thee to the extremest point    Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.
Some other is more fit.
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy masters father, Vincentio?
Beat him enough. After a little time,Ill beat him too.
I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.Our friends at least.
I do conceive.
Why?
My heartLeaps to be gone into my mother's bosom.
You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.
Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my face? You are now out of your text.   But we will draw the curtain and show you the picture.   Look you, sir, such a one I was this present. Is t not well done?
[aside]  Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.  [To TAILOR]  Go, take it hence. Begone, and say no more.
Reverend appearer, no;I threw her overboard with these very arms.
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,Of these known evils but to give me leave By circumstance to curse thy cursèd self.
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear As howling after music.
[to FERDINAND]    You do look, my son, in a moved sort,    As if you were dismayed. Be cheerful, sir.    Our revels now are ended.   These our actors,    As I foretold you, were all spirits and    Are melted into air, into thin air.    And like the baseless fabric of this vision,    The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,    The solemn temples,   the great globe itself,    Ye all which it inherit, shall dissolve,    And like this insubstantial pageant faded,    Leave not a rack behind.   We are such stuff    As dreams are made on, and our little life    Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vexed.    Bear with my weakness. My old brain is troubled.    Be not disturbed with my infirmity.    If you be pleased, retire into my cell    And there repose. A turn or two Ill walk    To still my beating mind.
The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I learned from my entertainment.   What I am and what I would are assecret as maidenhead.   To your ears, divinity. To any others, profanation.
He shall not.
O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.
[seeing the apparel]  O King Stephano! O peer, O worthy Stephano, look what awardrobe here is for thee!
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
My lord, I do protest
He is coming.
Hes gone, but his wifes killed.
How courtesy would seem to cover sin,    When what is done is like an hypocrite,    The which is good in nothing but in sight!    If it be true that I interpret false,    Then were it certain you were not so bad    As with foul incest to abuse your soul;    Where now you're both a father and a son,    By your untimely claspings with your child,    Which pleasure fits an husband, not a father;    And she an eater of her mother's flesh,    By the defiling of her parent's bed;    And both like serpents are, who though they feed    On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.    Antioch, farewell! for wisdom sees, those men    Blush not in actions blacker than the night,    Will shun no course to keep them from the light.    One sin, I know, another doth provoke;    Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke:    Poison and treason are the hands of sin,    Ay, and the targets, to put off the shame:    Then, lest my lie be cropp'd to keep you clear,    By flight I'll shun the danger which I fear.
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,As he had seen't or been an instrumentTo vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queenForbiddenly.
We'll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown tomake thee a pair; and I'll bring thee to the court myself.
We wish your peace.
Whether this beOr be not, Ill not swear.
[as CAMBIO]  Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
Pardon us, sir; with us at sea it hath been still    observed: and we are strong in custom.   Therefore    briefly yield her; for she must overboard straight.
How do you now?
Nay, then you lie. It is the blessèd sun.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
Here comes that which grows to the stalk; neverplucked yet, I can assure you.
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,And that my fortune rubs against the bias.
My remedy is then to pluck it out.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Well, sir, I will; therefore, I will, sir; thus:    If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,    Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,    That Timon cares not.   But if be sack fair Athens,    And take our goodly aged men by the beards,    Giving our holy virgins to the stain    Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war,    Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,    In pity of our aged and our youth,    I cannot choose but tell him, that I care not,    And let him take't at worst;   for their knives care not,    While you have throats to answer: for myself,    There's not a whittle in the unruly camp    But I do prize it at my love before    The reverend'st throat in Athens.   So I leave you    To the protection of the prosperous gods,    As thieves to keepers.
My lord, you nod. You do not mind the play.
Yours by this hand. And to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife! She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.
[aside]   Nay, then, tis time to stir him from his trance.    I pray, awake, sir! If you love the maid,    Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her.   Thus it stands:    Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd    That till the father rid his hands of her,    Master, your love must live a maid at home,    And therefore has he closely mewed her up,    Because she will not be annoyed with suitors.
Some are born great
No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,    As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,    Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound    The open ear of youth doth always listen;    Report of fashions in proud Italy,    Whose manners still our tardy apish nation    Limps after in base imitation.    Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity    So it be new, there's no respect how vile    That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?    Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,    Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.    Direct not him whose way himself will choose:    'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.
And badest me bury love.
If they do see thee they will murder thee.
Alas, I took great pains to study it, and tis poetical.
Where the warlike Smalus,That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?
Ay, with Cassio. Had she been true,    If heaven would make me such another world    Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,    Id not have sold her for it.
Lucius, I will.
Where is my lord the duke of Gloucester?I have sent for these strawberries.
Her husband, knave. Wouldst thou betray me?
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,    Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter    Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,    And here another. The one of them imports    The death of Cassio to be undertook    By Roderigo.
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:    Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,    Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.    Your husband, he is gone to save far off,    Whilst others come to make him lose at home:    Here am I left to underprop his land,    Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:    Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;    Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.
I thank you, valiant Cassio.What tidings can you tell me of my lord?
Now, thieves?
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.
Indeed!
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke.
So; lift there.
When, Harry, when?Obedience bids I should not bid again.
And ours with thine, befall what fortune will.
Stay, then. Ill go alone. Fear comes upon me.Oh, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
By whose direction foundst thou out this place?
[as LUCENTIO]   Gremio, tis known my father hath no less    Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses,    And twelve tight galleys.   These I will assure her,    And twice as much whate'er thou offerst next.
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.Come, strike up!
Well, be't so, prithee.   [Exit Gaoler]  Here's such ado to make no stain a stainAs passes colouring.  [Re-enter Gaoler, with EMILIA]  Dear gentlewoman,How fares our gracious lady?
I dare assure you, sir, tis almost two,And twill be supper time ere you come there.
A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'dWith letters of your love to her at large.
They are.
No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,    My name be blotted from the book of life,    And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!    But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;    And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.    Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;    Save back to England, all the world's my way.
Art not one?
Strike, drum.
They love not poison that do poison need,    Nor do I thee:   though I did wish him dead,    I hate the murderer, love him murdered.    The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,    But neither my good word nor princely favour:    With Cain go wander through shades of night,    And never show thy head by day nor light.    Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,    That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:    Come, mourn with me for that I do lament,    And put on sullen black incontinent:    I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,    To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:    March sadly after; grace my mournings here;    In weeping after this untimely bier.
Patience, good sir,Even for this charge.
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly. A quarrel, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains!   That we should, with joy, pleasance revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.
Would all were wellbut that will never be.I fear our happiness is at the height.
And did you see the handkerchief?
Call you me daughter?   Now, I promise you    You have showed a tender fatherly regard    To wish me wed to one half lunatic,    A madcup ruffian and a swearing Jack,    That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
Oh, treacherous villains!  [To LODOVICO and GRATIANO]   What are you there? Come in, and give some help.
Of your complexion.
[Aside to SAMPSON]  Say better. Here comes one of my masters kinsmen.
Be it forbid, my lord!
Well, Ill put it on, and I will dissemble myself in t, and I would I were the first that ever dissembled insuch a gown.
O calm dishonourable, vile submission!Alla stoccata carries it away.  [Draws his sword]   Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here;    come, put it on; keep thee warm.   Now, afore me, a    handsome fellow!   Come, thou shalt go home,   and    we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for    fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks,    and thou shalt be welcome.
And on set purpose let his armour rustUntil this day, to scour it in the dust.
What hath he said?
Most likely, sir.
Stay not, all's in vain.
He neither does nor shall.
Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens    again, and flourish with the highest.   Therefore    'tis not amiss we tender our loves to him, in this    supposed distress of his:   it will show honestly in    us; and is very likely to load our purposes with    what they travail for, if it be a just true report    that goes of his having.
I know my remedy. I must go fetch the thirdborough.
What is the matter, uncle?   speak;    Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,    That we may arm us to encounter it.
Remember who commended thy yellow stockings
The offence is not of such a bloody nature;    Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel    Might well have given us bloody argument.    It might have since been answered in repaying    What we took from them, which, for traffics sake,    Most of our city did.   Only myself stood out;    For which, if I be lapsèd in this place,    I shall pay dear.
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed!
Madam, good hope. His grace speaks cheerfully.
Masterly done:The very life seems warm upon her lip.
I might call himA thing divine, for nothing naturalI ever saw so noble.
[sitting down]     Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,    Woes scene, worlds shame, graves due by life usurped,    Brief abstract and record of tedious days,    Rest thy unrest on Englands lawful earth,    Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
I am glad at heartTo be so rid o' the business.
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go seeif the bear be gone from the gentleman and how muchhe hath eaten: they are never curst but when theyare hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll buryit.
Down with him, thief!
What things in the world canst thou nearest compareto thy flatterers?
My lord, 'tis nothing.
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
Where should they be set else? He were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
Why me, Timon?
What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?
No.
How have you slept, my lord?
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire    That staggers thus my person.   Exton, thy fierce hand    Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.    Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;    Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
Heard you this, Gonzalo?
Not any yet:But as the unthought-on accident is guiltyTo what we wildly do, so we professOurselves to be the slaves of chance and fliesOf every wind that blows.
The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son To be your comforter when he is gone.
This interchange of love, I here protest,Upon my part shall be inviolable.
What shall we do else? Were we not born under Taurus?
Hang thyself!
Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy fathers dead,    Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief    Shore his old thread in twain.   Did he live now,    This sight would make him do a desperate turn,    Yea, curse his better angel from his side    And fall to reprobation.
Come, sir, away.
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,    Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing    Like bulls, or rather lions.   Did t not wake you?    It struck mine ear most terribly.
What, neither?
Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most modest terms,   for I am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself with courtesy.   Sayest thou that house is dark?
Is she so hot a shrew as shes reported?
Despiteful and intolerable wrongs!    Shall I endure this monstrous villany?    I know from whence this same device proceeds:    May this be borne?   as if his traitorous sons,    That died by law for murder of our brother,    Have by my means been butcher'd wrongfully!    Go, drag the villain hither by the hair;    Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege:    For this proud mock I'll be thy slaughterman;    Sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great,    In hope thyself should govern Rome and me.
Then plainly know my hearts dear love is set    On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.    As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,    And all combined, save what thou must combine    By holy marriage.   When and where and how    We met, we wooed and made exchange of vow,    Ill tell thee as we pass, but this I pray:    That thou consent to marry us today.
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'dThe shadow of your face.
To her, widow!
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.
Hence! Hang not on my garments.
What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!
How blest am I    In my just censure, in my true opinion!    Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed    In being so blest!   There may be in the cup    A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,    And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge    Is not infected:   but if one present    The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known    How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,    With violent hefts. I have drunk,    and seen the spider.    Camillo was his help in this, his pander:    There is a plot against my life, my crown;    All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain    Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:    He has discover'd my design, and I    Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick    For them to play at will.   How came the posterns    So easily open?
About your years, my lord.
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?
And living too; for now his son is duke.
I say, my lord, that if I were a man,Their mother's bed-chamber should not be safeFor these bad bondmen to the yoke of Rome.
I have lost my gown.
Hes coming, madam; but in very strange manner. He is sure possessed, madam.
Not possible. For who shall bear your part    And be in Padua here Vincentios son,    Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,    Visit his countrymen and banquet them?
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soulBut I do love thee! And when I love thee notChaos is come again.
Oh, say so, and so be!
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.    You urged me as a judge; but I had rather    You would have bid me argue like a father.    O, had it been a stranger, not my child,    To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:    A partial slander sought I to avoid,    And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.    Alas, I look'd when some of you should say,    I was too strict to make mine own away;    But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue    Against my will to do myself this wrong.
Is t lost? Is t gone? Speak, is t out o' th' way?
Thou art like one of those fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword uponthe table and says God send me no need of thee!   and, by the operation of the second cup, draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.
It is an honor that I dream not of.
Faith, half asleep.
Content you, gentlemen. I will compound this strife.    'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both    That can assure my daughter greatest dower    Shall have my Biancas love.    Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
O, touch me not. I am not Stephano, but a cramp.
What sayst thou, noble heart?
Sirrah, hast thou a knife? come, let me see it.    Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration;    For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.    And when thou hast given it the emperor,    Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.
I thank him.
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Ill pay thy pleasure then.
My lord would speak. My duty hushes me.
Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs atale.
More than Prince of Cats. Oh, hes the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion.   He rests his minim restsone, two, and the third in your bosom.   The very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause.   Ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hai!
What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,    Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed    Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,    With slow but stately pace kept on his course,    Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee,    Bolingbroke!'    You would have thought the very windows spake,    So many greedy looks of young and old    Through casements darted their desiring eyes    Upon his visage, and that all the walls    With painted imagery had said at once    'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!'    Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,    Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,    Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:'    And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.
(  aside  ) Peace, I say.
Most heavenly music!It nips me unto listening, and thick slumberHangs upon mine eyes: let me rest.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuriesThat thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.
Well said, Hermione.
Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchios coming?
Why, why is this?    Thinkst thou Id make a life of jealousy,    To follow still the changes of the moon    With fresh suspicions? No! To be once in doubt    Is to be resolved.   Exchange me for a goat    When I shall turn the business of my soul    To such exsufflicate and blowed surmises,    Matching thy inference.   'Tis not to make me jealous    To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,    Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances.    Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.    Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw    The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,    For she had eyes and chose me.   No, Iago,    Ill see before I doubt, when I doubt, prove,    And on the proof there is no more but this:    Away at once with love or jealousy!
Marry, I saw your niece do more favors to the Counts servingman than ever she bestowed upon me. I sawt i'theorchard.
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed But that my coat is better than thou knowstI will make proof of thine.
Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.
A prince of Macedon, my royal father;    And the device he bears upon his shield    Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady;    The motto thus, in Spanish, 'Piu por dulzura que por fuerza.'
Mistrust it not, for sure AeacidesWas Ajax, called so from his grandfather.
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
I may so.
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,    To make my end too sudden:   learn, good soul,    To think our former state a happy dream;    From which awaked, the truth of what we are    Shows us but this:   I am sworn brother, sweet,    To grim Necessity, and he and I    Will keep a league till death.   Hie thee to France    And cloister thee in some religious house:    Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,    Which our profane hours here have stricken down.
Why, I pray you?
[sings in his own voice]    Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,    Tell me how thy lady does.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
(  aside  ) O, peace, peace!
Good my lord, be curedOf this diseased opinion, and betimes;For 'tis most dangerous.
He hath indeed, almost natural,   for besides that hes afool, hes a great quarreler,   and but that he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarreling,   tis thought among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
It is too late.  [he smothers her]
At my lodging.
Hadst thou groan'd for him    As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.    But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect    That I have been disloyal to thy bed,    And that he is a bastard, not thy son:    Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:    He is as like thee as a man may be,    Not like to me, or any of my kin,    And yet I love him.
What would my lord, but that he may not have,    Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?    Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
Father, tis thus: yourself and all the world    That talked of her have talked amiss of her.    If she be curst, it is for policy,    For shes not froward, but modest as the dove.    She is not hot, but temperate as the morn.    For patience she will prove a second Grissel,    And Roman Lucrece for her chastity.    And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together,    That upon Sunday is the wedding day.
Alas, what cry is that?
Good morrow, Catesby. You are early stirring.What news, what news in this our tott'ring state?
Lie thou there (throwing down a letter), for here comesthe trout that must be caught with tickling.
Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir?
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
I fear no uncles dead.
Forbear, forbear, I say! It is my lord the duke.Your grace is welcome to a man disgraced,Banished Valentine.
Oh, no, he goes into Mauritania and taketh away with him the fair Desdemona,   unless his abode be lingered here by some accidentwherein none can be so determinateas the removing of Cassio.
Her life is safest only in her birth.
O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!Love loving not itself none other can.
The honorable lady of the house, which is she?
You do yet taste    Some subtleties o' th' isle, that will not let you    Believe things certain.   Welcome, my friends all.     [aside to SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO]     But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded,    I here could pluck his highness' frown upon you    And justify you traitors.   At this time    I will tell no tales.
If you will not undo what you have donethat is, kill him whom you have recovereddesire it not.   Fare you wellat once. My bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell tales of me.   I am bound to the Count Orsinos court. Farewell.
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,    Which craves as desperate an execution    As that is desperate which we would prevent.    If, rather than to marry County Paris,    Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,    Then is it likely thou wilt undertake    A thing like death to chide away this shame,    That copest with death himself to scape from it.    An if thou darest, Ill give thee remedy.
Give us the place alone. We will hear this divinity.
I am the governor of this place you lie before.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art,    Since they do better thee in their command.    Thou hold'st a place, for which the pained'st fiend    Of hell would not in reputation change:    Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every    Coistrel that comes inquiring for his Tib;    To the choleric fisting of every rogue    Thy ear is liable; thy food is such    As hath been belch'd on by infected lungs.
Youll find it otherwise, I assure you.   Therefore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard,   for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath can furnish man withal.
She did show favor to the youth in your sight only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valor, to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.   You should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should have banged the youth into dumbness.   This was looked for at your hand, and this was balked.   The double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now sailed into the north of my ladys opinion, where you will hang like an icicle on a Dutchmans beard,   unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt either of valor or policy.
How now? Art thou mad?
Say no more:Howe'er the business goes, you have made faultI' the boldness of your speech.
Nay, good goose, bite not.
Richmond is on the seas.
O, by your leave, I pray you,    I bade you never speak again of him.    But, would you undertake another suit,    I had rather hear you to solicit that    Than music from the spheres.
I cry you mercy. Heres Cassio hurt by villains.
Reverend sir,    The gods can have no mortal officer    More like a god than you.   Will you deliver    How this dead queen re-lives?
Yes, keep you warm.
Thats a fault. That handkerchief    Did an Egyptian to my mother give,    She was a charmer and could almost read    The thoughts of people.   She told her, while she kept it    'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father    Entirely to her love, but if she lost it    Or made gift of it,   my fathers eye    Should hold her loathèd and his spirits should hunt    After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me    And bid me, when my fate would have me wived,    To give it her.   I did so, and take heed on t,    Make it a darling like your precious eye.    To lose t or give t away were such perdition    As nothing else could match.
Come, lets see the event.
Thats my office.
How now, Sir Proteus! How now, Turio!Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?
What follows this?How prettily the young swain seems to washThe hand was fair before! I have put you out:But to your protestation; let me hearWhat you profess.
Thats a degree to love.
Fetch Malvolio hither:    And yet, alas, now I remember me,    They say, poor gentleman, hes much distract.    A most extracting frenzy of mine own    From my remembrance clearly banished his.     (to FOOL)    How does he, sirrah?
Very well.
Ay, sir.
What, all so soon asleep? I wish mine eyesWould with themselves shut up my thoughts. I findThey are inclined to do so.
Under that's above me.Where feed'st thou o' days, Apemantus?
[waking and seeing them]  Now, good angels preserve the king!
Why, such is loves transgression.    Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,    Which thou wilt propagate, to have it pressed    With more of thine.   This love that thou hast shown    Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.    Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;    Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers eyes;    Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears.    What is it else? A madness most discreet,    A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.    Farewell, my coz.
And cursed be he that will not second it.
And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
Not having that which, having, makes them short.
Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer'swife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at aburthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads andtoads carbonadoed.
My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace,    But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,    All circumstances well considerèd.    You say that Edward is your brothers son;    So say we too, but not by Edwards wife.    For first was he contract to Lady Lucy    Your mother lives a witness to that vow    And afterward by substitute betrothed    To Bona, sister to the king of France.    These both put off, a poor petitioner,    A care-crazed mother to a many sons,    A beauty-waning and distressèd widow,    Even in the afternoon of her best days,    Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye,    Seduced the pitch and height of his degree    To base declension and loathed bigamy.    By her in his unlawful bed he got    This Edward, whom our manners term the Prince.    More bitterly could I expostulate,    Save that, for reverence to some alive,    I give a sparing limit to my tongue.    Then, good my lord, take to your royal self    This proffered benefit of dignity,    If not to bless us and the land withal,    Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry    From the corruption of abusing times    Unto a lineal, true-derivèd course.
Nay, I dare not swear it.
May you a better feast never behold,    You knot of mouth-friends I smoke and lukewarm water    Is your perfection.   This is Timon's last;    Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,    Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces    Your reeking villany.
Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, lady, lady, lady.
Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity    To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.    'Twas her two sons that murder'd Bassianus;    They cut thy sister's tongue and ravish'd her    And cut her hands and trimm'd her as thou saw'st.
I must perforce. Farewell.
Proceed:No foot shall stir.
[Aside]   My only love sprung from my only hate!    Too early seen unknown, and known too late!    Prodigious birth of love it is to me,    That I must love a loathèd enemy.
Blessed figs-end! The wine she drinks is made of grapes. If she had been blessed, she would never have loved the Moor.   Blessed pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst not mark that?
Well, well; as for him, he brought his disease    hither: here he does but repair it.   I know he will    come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the    sun.
Was't so?
Banish me!Banish your dotage; banish usury,That makes the senate ugly.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
An thou hadst hated meddlers sooner, thou shouldsthave loved thyself better now. What man didst thouever know unthrift that was beloved after his means?
It is. May it be done?
Whats the matter?
How now, who calls?
Sir, my mistress sends you wordThat she is busy, and she cannot come.
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
O, my heart!
Lay her a-hold, a-hold! Set her two courses off to sea again.Lay her off!
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Ay, so we will.
Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.
I embrace you.    Give me my robes. I am wild in my beholding.    O heavens bless my girl!   But, hark, what music?    Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him    O'er, point by point, for yet he seems to doubt,    How sure you are my daughter.   But, what music?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,    Speak, and look back, and pry on every side,    Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,    Intending deep suspicion.   Ghastly looks    Are at my service, like enforcèd smiles,    And both are ready in their offices,    At any time to grace my stratagems.    But what, is Catesby gone?
For ever may my knees grow to the earth,My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouthUnless a pardon ere I rise or speak.
[Aside]  Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.
Then move not, while my prayers effect I take.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on t. Now if this suit lay in Biancas powerHow quickly should you speed!
'Tis not a year or two shows us a man.    They are all but stomachs, and we all but food.    To eat us hungerly, and when they are full,    They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband!
Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.
[joining them]    If ancient sorrow be most reverend,    Give mine the benefit of seigniory,    And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.    If sorrow can admit society,    Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine.    I had an Edward till a Richard killed him;    I had a husband till a Richard killed him.    Thou hadst an Edward till a Richard killed him;    Thou hadst a Richard till a Richard killed him.
If God prevent not, I purpose so.
I prithee, gentle friend,    Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway    In this uncivil and unjust extent    Against thy peace.   Go with me to my house,    And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks    This ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby    Mayst smile at this.   Thou shalt not choose but go.    Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me!    He started one poor heart of mine in thee.
And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crown'd,    That I account them blessings; for by these    Shall I try friends:   you shall perceive how you    Mistake my fortunes; I am wealthy in my friends.    Within there! Flaminius! Servilius!
Six frozen winter spent,Return with welcome home from banishment.
Madam, please you peruse this letter.    Pardon me, madam;   I have unadvised    Deliver'd you a paper that I should not:    This is the letter to your ladyship.
Not this hour, lieutenant, tis not yet ten o' the clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemonawho let us not therefore blame.   He hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sportfor Jove.
At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.
I pray thee, moralize them.
I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
O true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straightThe greatest strength and power that he can make And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
I chafe you, if I tarry. Let me go.
Oh, was she so? I must    Once in a month recount what thou hast been,    Which thou forgetst.   This damned witch Sycorax,    For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible    To enter human hearing, from Argier,    Thou knowst, was banished.   For one thing she did    They would not take her life. Is not this true?
Your Honors players, hearing your amendment,    Are come to play a pleasant comedy,    For so your doctors hold it very meet,    Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood,    And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy.    Therefore they thought it good you hear a play    And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,    Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.
Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order.
Has almost charmed me from my profession, bypersuading me to it.
I am to blame.
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,    Nor no man's lord;   I have no name, no title,    No, not that name was given me at the font,    But 'tis usurp'd:   alack the heavy day,    That I have worn so many winters out,    And know not now what name to call myself!    O that I were a mockery king of snow,    Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,    To melt myself away in water-drops!    Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,  An if my word be sterling yet in England,  Let it command a mirror hither straight,    That it may show me what a face I have,    Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
[to SEBASTIAN]  Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
[t    o  VIOLA   ]  I must entreat of you some of that money.
If I should be? I had rather be a peddler. Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.
What a full fortune does the Thick-lips oweIf he can carryt thus!
This wind you talk of, blows us from ourselves.Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
You mistake, knight. Accost is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.
Thy gown? Why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see t.    O mercy, God! What masking stuff is here?    Whats this? A sleeve? 'Tis like a demi-cannon.    What, up and down, carved like an apple tart?    Heres snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,    Like to a censer in a barbers shop.    Why, what i' devils name, tailor, callst thou this?
Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in,    I will continue that I broached in jest.    I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife    With wealth enough, and young and beauteous,    Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman.    Her only fault, and that is faults enough,    Is that she is intolerable curst,    And shrewd and froward,   so beyond all measure    That, were my state far worser than it is,    I would not wed her for a mine of gold.
But, for your conscience?
They confess    Toward thee forgetfulness too general, gross:    Which now the public body, which doth seldom    Play the recanter, feeling in itself    A lack of Timon's aid, hath sense withal    Of its own fail, restraining aid to Timon;    And send forth us, to make their sorrow'd render,    Together with a recompense more fruitful    Than their offence can weigh down by the dram;    Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth    As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs    And write in thee the figures of their love,    Ever to read them thine.
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
Blest, and mine own!
Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Wheres my cousin Toby?   Let some of my people have a special care of him. I would not have him miscarry for the half of mydowry.
Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond    That he is bound to?   Wife, thou art a fool.    Boy, let me see the writing.
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter, husband?
Come, poor babe:    I have heard, but not believed,    the spirits o' the dead    May walk again:   i   f such thing be, thy mother    Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream    So like a waking.   To me comes a creature,    Sometimes her head on one side, some another;    I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,    So fill'd and so becoming:   in pure white robes,    Like very sanctity, she did approach    My cabin where I lay; thrice bow'd before me,    And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes    Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon    Did this break-from her:   'Good Antigonus,    Since fate, against thy better disposition,    Hath made thy person for the thrower-out    Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,    Places remote enough are in Bohemia,    There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe    Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,    I prithee, call't.   For this ungentle business    Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see    Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks    She melted into air.   Affrighted much,    I did in time collect myself and thought    This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:    Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,    I will be squared by this.   I do believe    Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that    Apollo would, this being indeed the issue    Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,    Either for life or death, upon the earth    Of its right father.   Blossom, speed thee well!    There lie, and there thy character: there these;    Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,    And still rest thine.   The storm begins; poor wretch,    That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed    To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,    But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I    To be by oath enjoin'd to this.   Farewell!    The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have    A lullaby too rough: I never saw    The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!    Well may I get aboard!   This is the chase:    I am gone for ever.
But half an hour!
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,    Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;    For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,    Divides one thing entire to many objects;    Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon    Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry    Distinguish form:   so your sweet majesty,    Looking awry upon your lord's departure,    Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail;    Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows    Of what it is not.   Then, thrice-gracious queen,    More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen;    Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,    Which for things true weeps things imaginary.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brothers child!    O Prince! O cousin! Husband! Oh, the blood is spilled    Of my dear kinsman!   Prince, as thou art true,    For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.    O cousin, cousin!
O detestable villain! call'st thou that trimming?
You tempt him over-much.
Ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do I too.He does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.
He is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing it.
An he speak any thing against me, Ill take him down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks.    And if I cannot, Ill find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills. I am none of his skains-mates.   [To PETER]   And thou must stand by, too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
(  aside  ) Now is the woodcock near the gin.
Welcome, my lord. I dance attendance here.I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
Mistress!
To murder me?
If I should tell my history, it would seemLike lies disdain'd in the reporting.
Yes, that the king is dead.
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.Have to my widow, and if she be froward, Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.
Out and alas, that was my ladys voice.
What, for being a puritan? Thy exquisite reason, dear knight?
Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these gifts a curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like Mistress Malls picture?   Why dost thou not go to church in a galliard and come home in a coranto?   My verywalk should be a jig. I would not so much as make waterbut in a sink-a-pace.   What dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in?   I did think, by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star ofa galliard.
My noble general, Timon is dead;    Entomb'd upon the very hem o' the sea;    And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which    With wax I brought away, whose soft impression    Interprets for my poor ignorance.
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
Catesby, I come. Lords, will you go with me?
I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point:Nurse, give it me; my sword shall soon dispatch it.
Give me my boots, I say.
'Tis well bethought.    She questionless with her sweet harmony    And other chosen attractions, would allure,    And make a battery through his deafen'd parts,    Which now are midway stopp'd:    She is all happy as the fairest of all,    And, with her fellow maids is now upon    The leafy shelter that abuts against    The island's side.
Is not this man jealous?
Come, where be these gallants? Whos at home?
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot withconscience take it.
Why, but you are now well enough. How came you thus recovered?
And so is now, or was so very late.    For but a month ago I went from hence,    And then twas fresh in murmur   as, you know,    What great ones do the less will prattle of    That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
Royal cheer, I warrant you.
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the oldshepherd deliver the manner how he found it:whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were allcommanded out of the chamber; only this methought Iheard the shepherd say, he found the child.
(sings) What an if you do?
Who intercepts my expedition?
Why, whats the matter?
Your servant and your friend;One that attends your ladyship's command.
So please your Lordship to accept our duty.
To satisfy my lady.
Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?
There is not only disgrace and dishonor in that, monster, but an infinite loss.
And so did I.
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
No; I eat not lords.
No, I will rob Tellus of her weed,    To strew thy green with flowers: the yellows, blues,    The purple violets, and marigolds,    Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave,    While summer-days do last.   Ay me! poor maid,    Born in a tempest, when my mother died,    This world to me is like a lasting storm,    Whirring me from my friends.
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.
Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.
[as LITIO]  Madam, tis now in tune.
Go with me to the vault.
Will you tell me that?His son was but a ward two years ago.
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
Well, my good lord.
I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand strong,or so.
Thou art not altogether a fool.
Why, she was wash'd and cut and trimm'd, and 'twasTrim sport for them that had the doing of it.
My lord, there needs no such apology.    I do beseech your Grace pardon me,    Who, earnest in the service of my God,    Deferred the visitation of my friends.    But, leaving this, what is your Graces pleasure?
Almost as well as I do know myself:To think upon her woes I do protestThat I have wept a hundred several times.
O, peace, Paulina!    Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,    As I by thine a wife:   this is a match,    And made between's by vows.   Thou hast found mine;    But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,    As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many    A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far    For him, I partly know his mind   to find thee    An honourable husband.   Come, Camillo,    And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty    Is richly noted and here justified    By us, a pair of kings.   Let's from this place.    What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,    That e'er I put between your holy looks    My ill suspicion.   This is your son-in-law,    And son unto the king, who, heavens directing,    Is troth-plight to your daughter.   Good Paulina,    Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely    Each one demand an answer to his part    Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first    We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.
Why, that was when    Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,    Ere I could make thee open thy white hand    And clap thyself my love:   then didst thou utter    'I am yours for ever.'
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until    You have drawn oaths from him not to stay.   You, sir,    Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure    All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction    The by-gone day proclaim'd:   say this to him,    He's beat from his best ward.
A most unworthy and unnatural lordCan do no more.
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?But who comes here?
The old priest at Saint Lukes Church is at your command at all hours.
Then put up your pipes in your bag, for Ill away. Go, vanish into air, away!
The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;    For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.
Why, sir?
It alone concerns your ear.   I bring no overture of war,no taxation of homage. I hold the olive in my hand   . My words are as full of peace as matter.
[To a SERVINGMAN]  What lady is that which doth enrich the handOf yonder knight?
Oh, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Will t please your Mightiness to wash your hands?    O, how we joy to see your wit restored!    O, that once more you knew but what you are!    These fifteen years you have been in a dream    Or, when you waked, so waked as if you slept.
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
He could not miss t.
[To VINCENTIO]   Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.   Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell Signior Lucentio that hisfather is come from Pisa and is here at the door to speak with him.
A most high miracle!
By innocence I swear, and by my youth    I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth,    And that no woman has, nor never none    Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.    And so adieu, good madam. Nevermore    Will I my masters tears to you deplore.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eyeThan twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,And I am proof against their enmity.
I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking,    So full of valor that they smote the air    For breathing in their faces, beat the ground    For kissing of their feet;   yet always bending    Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor,    At which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their ears,    Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses    As they smelt music.   So I charmed their ears    That, calflike, they my lowing followed through    Toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and thorns,    Which entered their frail shins.   At last I left them    I' th' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell,    There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake    O'erstunk their feet.
A devil.
Old sir, I know    She prizes not such trifles as these are:    The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd    Up in my heart; which I have given already,    But not deliver'd.   O, hear me breathe my life    Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,    Hath sometime loved!   I take thy hand, this hand,    As soft as dove's down and as white as it,    Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd    snow that's bolted    By the northern blasts twice o'er.
O Stephano, hast any more of this?
I look down towards his feet, but thats a fable.If that thou best a devil, I cannot kill thee.
Joy had the like conception in our eyesAnd at that instant like a babe sprung up.
She thinks not so; peruse this writing else.
M.O.A.I. This simulation is not as the former, and yet to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of these letters are in my name. Soft, here follows prose.    [reads]    If this fall into thy hand, revolve.   In my stars I am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness. Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em.   Thy Fates open their hands. Let thy blood and spirit embrace them. And, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy humble slough and appear fresh.   Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants. Let thy tongue tang arguments of state. Put thyself into the trick of singularity.   She thus advises thee that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered. I say, remember.   Go to, thou art made, if thou desirst to be so; if not, let me see theea steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthyto touch Fortunes fingers.   Farewell. She that would alter services with thee,    The Fortunate Unhappy    Daylight and champaign discovers not more. This is open.   I will be proud, I will read politic authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point- devise the very man.   I donot now fool myself, to let imagination jade me, for every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me.   Shedid commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praisemy leg being cross-gartered, and in this she manifests herself to my love, and with a kind of injunction, drives me to these habits of her liking.   I thank my stars I am happy. I will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yeta postscript.    [reads]    Thou canst not choose but know who I am.   If thou entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling. Thy smiles become thee well.   Therefore in my presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee.    Jove, I thank thee! I will smile. I will do everything that thou wilt have me.
Give me now leave to leave thee.
I am appointed him to murder you.
My nieces chambermaid.
Hark, how these instruments summon to supper. The messengers of Venice stays the meat.Go in, and weep not. All things shall be well.
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;    Spur post, and get before him to the king,    And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.    I'll not be long behind; though I be old,    I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:    And never will I rise up from the ground    Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone!
So I amto let him live.
Madam, I will.
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,Hark in thine ear.  [whispers to ARIEL]
Good madam, whats the matter with my lord?
Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them?
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.Lend me thy handkerchief.
In faith, too much.    I find it still, when I have leave to sleep.    Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,    She puts her tongue a little in her heart    And chides with thinking.
What, prithee?
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?    If I know how or which way to order these affairs    Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,    Never believe me.   Both are my kinsmen:    The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath    And duty bids defend; the other again    Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd,    Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.    Well, somewhat we must do.   Come, cousin, I'll    Dispose of you.    Gentlemen, go, muster up your men,    And meet me presently at Berkeley.    I should to Plashy too;    But time will not permit: all is uneven,    And every thing is left at six and seven.
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.
Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody thoughts.
Will you walk, sir?O Desdemona
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.    What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights?    Eight score eight hours?   And lovers' absent hours    More tedious than the dial eightscore times!    Oh weary reckoning!
I think so. Kill'd!    She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me    Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter    Upon thy tongue as in my thought:   now, good now,    Say so but seldom.
Then I am paid;    And once again I do receive thee honest.    Who by repentance is not satisfied    Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased.    By penitence the Eternal's wrath's appeased:    And, that my love may appear plain and free,    All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne    In him, a royal prince, and many more    Of noble blood in this declining land.    The king is not himself, but basely led    By flatterers;   and what they will inform,    Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all,    That will the king severely prosecute    'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
Ill sell all my land.
[To BIONDELLO]  Come hither, crack-hemp.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he hauntswakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
Come, Marcus, let us go. Publius, follow me.
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.I see a woman may be made a foolIf she had not a spirit to resist.
How now, Roderigo!
My actions are as noble as my thoughts,    That never relish'd of a base descent.    I came unto your court for honour's cause,    And not to be a rebel to her state;    And he that otherwise accounts of me,    This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy.
Go, girl. I cannot blame thee now to weep,For such an injury would vex a very saint,Much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
Not so, sir, I do care for something. But in my conscience, sir, I do not care for you.   If that be to care for nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.
Wherefore, sweetheart? Whats your metaphor?
Nay then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
[aside]  Did not I say he would work it out? The cur is excellent at faults.
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory    Can from his mother win the duke of York,    Anon expect him here;   but if she be obdurate    To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid    We should infringe the holy privilege    Of blessèd sanctuary!   Not for all this land    Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.
Spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. Come, shall we fall to work?
Every mans conscience is a thousand men,To fight against this guilty homicide.
Look where the youngest wren of nine comes.
What wouldst thou now? If thou darest tempt me further,draw thy sword.
Go, do our bidding; hence!
You must needs dine with me: go not you henceTill I have thank'd you: when dinner's done,Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine, and therefore fire! Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
How now, what news?
O gentle Aaron, we are all undone!Now help, or woe betide thee evermore!
You can fool no more money out of me at this throw.   If you will let your lady know I am here to speak with her,and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made    More homely than thy state.   For thee, fond boy,    If I may ever know thou dost but sigh    That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never    I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession;    Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,    Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:    Follow us to the court.   Thou churl, for this time,    Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee    From the dead blow of it.   And you, enchantment.    Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,    That makes himself, but for our honour therein,    Unworthy thee,   if ever henceforth thou    These rural latches to his entrance open,    Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,    I will devise a death as cruel for thee    As thou art tender to't.
No matter where; of comfort no man speak:    Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;    Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes    Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,    Let's choose executors and talk of wills:    And yet not so, for what can we bequeath    Save our deposed bodies to the ground?    Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's,    And nothing can we call our own but death    And that small model of the barren earth    Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.    For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground    And tell sad stories of the death of kings;    How some have been deposed; some slain in war,    Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;    Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd;    All murder'd:   for within the hollow crown    That rounds the mortal temples of a king    Keeps Death his court   and there the antic sits,    Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,    Allowing him a breath, a little scene,    To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks,    Infusing him with self and vain conceit,    As if this flesh which walls about our life,    Were brass impregnable,   and humour'd thus    Comes at the last and with a little pin    Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!    Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood    With solemn reverence: throw away respect,    Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,    For you have but mistook me all this while:    I live with bread like you, feel want,    Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,    How can you say to me, I am a king?
Despair not, madam.
You breathe in vain.
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.
Lucentio! Oh, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold on him, I charge you in the Dukes name. O my son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?
Patience, I say. Your mind may change.
What courage, sir? God save you!
Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too muchhomely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.    The secret mischiefs that I set abroach    I lay unto the grievous charge of others.    Clarence, whom I indeed have cast in darkness,    I do beweep to many simple gulls,    Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham,    And tell them tis the queen and her allies    That stir the king against the duke my brother.    Now they believe it and withal whet me    To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey;    But then I sigh and, with a piece of scripture,    Tell them that God bids us do good for evil;    And thus I clothe my naked villainy    With odd old ends stolen out of Holy Writ,    And seem a saint when most I play the devil.
I thank my liege, that in regard of me    He shortens four years of my son's exile:    But little vantage shall I reap thereby;    For, ere the six years that he hath to spend    Can change their moons and bring their times about    My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light    Shall be extinct with age and endless night;    My inch of taper will be burnt and done,    And blindfold death not let me see my son.
The gods confound them all in thy conquest;And thee after, when thou hast conquer'd!
Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape,    And with a virtuous visor hide deep vice.    He is my son, ay, and therein my shame,    Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.
Fool!
Dearly my delicate Ariel. Do not approachTill thou dost hear me call.
Nor thou altogether a wise man: as much foolery asI have, so much wit thou lackest.
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,    But presently prevent the ways to wail.    To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,    Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,    And so your follies fight against yourself.    Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight:    And fight and die is death destroying death;    Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.
Excellent good, i' faith.
He that dies pays all debts.I defy thee!Mercy upon us!
What handkerchief?Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,That which so often you did bid me steal.
I am in my condition    A prince, MirandaI do think, a king;    I would, not so!and would no more endure    This wooden slavery than to suffer    The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak.    The very instant that I saw you did    My heart fly to your service, there resides    To make me slave to it, and for your sake    Am I this patient log-man.
I cry you mercy, then,    I took you for that cunning whore of Venice    That married with Othello.   You, mistress,    That have the office opposite to Saint Peter    And keep the gate of hell!
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom.    Advance our standards. Set upon our foes.    Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,    Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons.    Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.
I must away today, before night come.    Make it no wonder.   If you knew my business,    You would entreat me rather go than stay.    And, honest company, I thank you all,    That have beheld me give away myself    To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife.    Dine with my father, drink a health to me,    For I must hence, and farewell to you all.
How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the city?
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.
Like a drowned man, a fool and a madman. One draught above heat makes him a fool, the second mads him, and a third drowns him.
Ay, lord. She will become thy bed, I warrant.And bring thee forth brave brood.
In the wars. And that may you be bold to say in your foolery.
Well, do your discretion.
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,To-day, as I came by, I called there;But I shall grieve you to report the rest.
My lord, I warrant you we will play our partAs he shall think by our true diligenceHe is no less than what we say he is.
To him, Sir Topas.
[Aside]  A pretty moral.
[Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaintmay be to the flight of my master.
Humbly I thank your lordship: never mayThe state or fortune fall into my keeping,Which is not owed to you!
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,    Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,    Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,    And in despite Ill cram thee with more food!    [Begins to opens the tomb with his tools]
I take it up; and by that sword I swear    Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,    I'll answer thee in any fair degree,    Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:    And when I mount, alive may I not light,    If I be traitor or unjustly fight!
An if it please thee! why, assure thee, Lucius,    'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak;    For I must talk of murders, rapes and massacres,    Acts of black night, abominable deeds,    Complots of mischief, treason, villanies    Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform'd:    And this shall all be buried by my death,    Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.
As I! Fie upon thee!
What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
Then honour be but a goal to my will,This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill.
I did say so    When first I raised the tempest.   Say, my spirit,    How fares the king and s followers?
Farewell, farewell.If more thou dost perceive, let me know more. Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
And so was I. Ill bear you company.
It is so.
Next, he's the governor of this country, and a manwhom I am bound to.
What sayest thou?
Apt, in good faith, very apt. Well, go thy way.   If Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece ofEves flesh as any in Illyria.
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it!    Who is it that complains unto the king    That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?    By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly    That fill his ears with such dissentious rumors.    Because I cannot flatter and look fair,    Smile in mens faces, smooth, deceive and cog,    Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,    I must be held a rancorous enemy.    Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,    But thus his simple truth must be abused    With silken, sly, insinuating jacks?
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught    My frail mortality to know itself,    And by those fearful objects to prepare    This body, like to them, to what I must;    For death remember'd should be like a mirror,    Who tells us life's but breath, to trust it error.    I'll make my will then, and, as sick men do    Who know the world, see heaven, but, feeling woe,    Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did;    So I bequeath a happy peace to you    And all good men, as every prince should do;    My riches to the earth from whence they came;     [To the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS]     But my unspotted fire of love to you.    Thus ready for the way of life or death,    I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.
No, believe me.
And the rarest that e'er came there.
(  aside  ) Ah, rogue!
'Tis much deep: and it should seem by the sun,Your master's confidence was above mine;Else, surely, his had equall'd.
It seems you loved not her, to leave her token.She is dead, belike?
Speak within door.
Ill wait upon your Lordship.
Nay, good, be patient.
He has a little galled me, I confess.And, as the jest did glance away from me,'Tis ten to one it maimed you two outright.
It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.
If it be that
Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee straight    Adonis painted by a running brook    And Cytherea all in sedges hid,    Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,    Even as the waving sedges play with wind.
Oh, heavens forfend!
Fool, fool, fool, I say!
Well, more gold: what then?Believe't, that we'll do any thing for gold.
Here, most gracious liege.
You may say it, but not swear it.
I tell thee, man, tis better with me now    Than when thou metst me last where now we meet.    Then was I going prisoner to the Tower    By the suggestion of the queens allies.    But now, I tell theekeep it to thyself    This day those enemies are put to death,    And I in better state than e'er I was.
Why, I am glad on t. This is well. Stand up.
Unto the dignity and height of fortune, The high imperial type of this earths glory.
Flaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my lord ready tocome forth?
Then hes a rogue, and a passy-measures pavin. I hate adrunken rogue.
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
I say, my lords, he has done fair service,    And slain in fight many of your enemies:    How full of valour did he bear himself    In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!
I do I know not what and fear to find    Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.    Fate, show thy force. Ourselves we do not owe.    What is decreed must be, and be this so.
We thank your Honor.
A noble spirit!
God i good een. I pray, sir, can you read?
Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?
It is; you lie, you lie:    I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,    Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,    Or else a hovering temporizer, that    Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,    Inclining to them both:   were my wife's liver    Infected as her life, she would not live    The running of one glass.
Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.
An honest poor servant of yours.
Wherefore?
Heres packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
O my good lord, yonders foul murders done!
The ground is bloody.Search about the churchyard.Go, some of you. Whoeer you find, attach.
I had forgot myself; am I not king?    Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.    Is not the king's name twenty thousand names?    Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes    At thy great glory.   Look not to the ground,    Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?    High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York    Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?
So will it, madam till I lie with you.
[To VINCENTIO]    Good morrow, gentle mistress, where away?    Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,    Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?    Such war of white and red within her cheeks!    What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty    As those two eyes become that heavenly face?    Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.    Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beautys sake.
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.
I know't too well.Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:Though he does bear some signs of me, yet youHave too much blood in him.
Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.    Even now I curse the dayand yet, I think,    Few come within the compass of my curse,    Wherein I did not some notorious ill,    As kill a man, or else devise his death,    Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it,    Accuse some innocent and forswear myself,    Set deadly enmity between two friends,    Make poor men's cattle break their necks;    Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night,    And bid the owners quench them with their tears.    Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their graves,    And set them upright at their dear friends' doors,    Even when their sorrows almost were forgot;    And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,    Have with my knife carved in Roman letters,    'Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.'    Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things    As willingly as one would kill a fly,    And nothing grieves me heartily indeed    But that I cannot do ten thousand more.
Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him:    You must consider that a prodigal course    Is like the sun's; but not, like his, recoverable.    I fear 'tis deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse;    That is one may reach deep enough, and yet    Find little.
To do what?
Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,    Suddenly taken;   and hath sent post haste    To entreat your majesty to visit him.
We are but plain fellows, sir.
The king and prince at prayers. Lets assist them, for our case is as theirs.
To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield;And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,We with our travels will endeavour us.
'Tis very true: you were in presence then;And you can witness with me this is true.
Do ye triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?
What is the matter?
How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath    To say to me that thou art out of breath?    The excuse that thou dost make in this delay    Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.    Is thy news good, or bad? Answer to that.    Say either, and Ill stay the circumstance.    Let me be satisfied. Is t good or bad?
What is the business?
Ay, and a kind one too.Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
Is it no more to be your daughter than    To say my mother's name was Thaisa?    Thaisa was my mother, who did end    The minute I began.
In his bosom? In what chapter of his bosom?
You may, sir. 'Tis a point of wisdom. Fare you well.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.
How now! canst stand?
They are loves I bear to you.
At that sad stop, my lord,    Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops    Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.
On your allegiance,Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,Where were her life? she durst not call me so,If she did know me one. Away with her!
Well thought upon. I have it here about me.     [He gives a paper]     When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.    But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,    Withal obdurate;   do not hear him plead,    For Clarence is well-spoken and perhaps    May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
Nay, good lieutenant! Alas, gentlemenHelp, ho! Lieutenantsir, MontanoHelp, masters!Heres a goodly watch indeed!
Zounds, he dies! I had forgot the reward.
Why, what is it, my lord?
I beg of you to know me, good my lord,To accept my grief and whilst this poor wealth lastsTo entertain me as your steward still.
[aside]  Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.
No, I warrant you. I will not adventure my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh me asleep, for I am very heavy?
See where she comes and brings your froward wives    As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.    Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not.    Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
I partly know the man. Go, call him hither, boy
My lord, there is a messenger from RomeDesires to be admitted to your presence.
[to FERDINAND and MIRANDA]  Give me your hands.Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heartThat doth not wish you joy.
[To TYBALT]  Up, sir, go with me.I charge thee in the Princes name, obey.
Ay, traitor.
If you would not so,    You pity not the state, nor the remembrance    Of his most sovereign name; consider little    What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue,    May drop upon his kingdom and devour    Incertain lookers on.   What were more holy    Than to rejoice the former queen is well?    What holier than, for royalty's repair,    For present comfort and for future good,    To bless the bed of majesty again    With a sweet fellow to't?
I do beseech you either not believe    The envious slanders of her false accusers,    Or if she be accused in true report,    Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds    From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
How! Julia!
That she is living,    Were it but told you, should be hooted at    Like an old tale:   but it appears she lives,    Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.    Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel    And pray your mother's blessing.   Turn, good lady;    Our Perdita is found.
Fare thee well, fare thee well.
So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again,My Alcibiades. With me? what is your will?
I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster.A most scurvy monster. I could find in my heart to beathim
Good my lord, pardon me,    Though I am bound to every act of duty    I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.    Utter my thoughts?   Why, say they are vile and false,    As wheres that palace whereinto foul things    Sometimes intrude not?   Who has that breast so pure    Wherein uncleanly apprehensions    Keep leets and law-days and in sessions sit    With meditations lawful?
Why dost thou cry 'alas'?
But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would havebeen that day in the belfry.
[Aside]  Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
How, sir? How?
Good, speak to th' mariners. Fall to t yarely, or we run ourselves aground. Bestir, bestir.
Nor I.
Toad!
'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.
Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
The worser welcome.    I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors.    In honest plainness thou hast heard me say    My daughter is not for thee.   And now in madness,    Being full of supper and distempering drafts,    Upon malicious knavery dost thou come    To start my quiet?
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, willyou use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.
I am a very villain else.
There's time enough for that;    Lest they desire upon this push to trouble    Your joys with like relation. Go together,    You precious winners all; your exultation    Partake to every one.   I, an old turtle,    Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there    My mate, that's never to be found again,    Lament till I am lost.
I will not rise unless your Highness hear me.
The king my father, sir, has drunk to you.
Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses;My mother gave it me.
Plantagenet.
But to be frank, and give it thee again.    And yet I wish but for the thing I have.    My bounty is as boundless as the sea,    My love as deep. The more I give to thee,    The more I have, for both are infinite.
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,    More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.    This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound;    This let alone will all the rest confound.
I am glad of this, for now I shall have reason    To show the love and duty that I bear you    With franker spirit.   Therefore, as I am bound,    Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.    Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio.    Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure.    I would not have your free and noble nature    Out of self-bounty be abused. Look to t.    I know our country disposition well.    In Venice they do let God see the pranks    They dare not show their husbands.   Their best conscience    Is not to leave t undone, but keept unknown.
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
Shes dead, deceased, shes dead. Alack the day!
Then sit we down, and let us all consult.My son and I will have the wind of you:Keep there: now talk at pleasure of your safety.
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself, And see how he will take it at your hands.
I never saw so huge a billow, sir,As toss'd it upon shore.
Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.    He bears him like a portly gentleman,    And, to say truth, Verona brags of him    To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.    I would not for the wealth of all the town    Here in my house do him disparagement.    Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.    It is my will, the which if thou respect,    Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,    An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
To the health of our general!
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
I brought my master news of Juliets death,    And then in post he came from Mantua    To this same place, to this same monument.    [Shows a letter]   This letter he early bid me give his father,    And threatened me with death, going in the vault,    If I departed not and left him there.
What news with you, sir?
I neither know it nor can learn of him.
Nay, you shall have no hat.  [Giving it to PERDITA]  Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
We thank your grace.
Nay, thats certain. They that dally nicely with words may quickly make them wanton.
Misprision in the highest degree!   Lady, Cucullus non facit monachum   thats as much to say as I wear not motley in my brain.   Good madonna, give me leave to proveyou a fool.
Say you?
Master, it is no time to chide you now.    Affection is not rated from the heart.    If love have touched you, naught remains but so:     Redime te captum quam queas minimo.
My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess,    Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her:    For I have heard my grandsire say full oft,    Extremity of griefs would make men mad;    And I have read that Hecuba of Troy    Ran mad through sorrow: that made me to fear;    Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt    Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,    And would not, but in fury, fright my youth:    Which made me down to throw my books, and fly    Causeless, perhaps. But pardon me, sweet aunt:    And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go,    I will most willingly attend your ladyship.
Who knows not that?
An unauthorized kiss!
I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this gentleman till my return.
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.
My lord, he doth deny to come.
No, not a grize. For tis a vulgar proofThat very oft we pity enemies.
In happy time here comes the duke himself.
You must amend your drunkenness.
[aside]  I see shes like to have neither cap nor gown.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      What, threat you me with telling of the king?    Tell him, and spare not.   Look, what I have said,    I will avouch t in presence of the king;    I dare adventure to be sent to th' Tower.    'Tis time to speak. My pains are quite forgot.
O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods    themselves have provided that I shall have much help    from you: how had you been my friends else?   why    have you that charitable title from thousands, did    not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told    more of you to myself than you can with modesty    speak in your own behalf; and thus far I confirm    you.   O you gods, think I, what need we have any    friends, if we should ne'er have need of 'em? they    were the most needless creatures living, should we    ne'er have use for 'em, and would most resemble    sweet instruments hung up in cases that keep their    sounds to themselves.   Why, I have often wished    myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you. We    are born to do benefits: and what better or    properer can we can our own than the riches of our    friends? O, what a precious comfort 'tis, to have    so many, like brothers, commanding one another's    fortunes!   O joy, e'en made away ere 't can be born!    Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks: to    forget their faults, I drink to you.
[waking]  The strangeness of your story putHeaviness in me.
We'll bear, with your lordship.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friendWhich you weep for.
O God, did Romeos hand shed Tybalts blood?
Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,    How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?    What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee    To make a second fall of cursed man?    Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?    Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,    Divine his downfall?   Say, where, when, and how,    Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad.    And his unbookish jealousy must construe    Poor Cassios smiles, gestures, and light behavior    Quite in the wrong.   How do you now, lieutenant?
[aside]  Sowter will cry upon t for all this, though it be as rank as a fox.
You have a daughter called Elizabeth, Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thouart as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
What if it should be so?
When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,    But for the sunset of my brothers son    It rains downright.    How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears,    Evermore showering? In one little body    Thou counterfeitst a bark, a sea, a wind,    For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,    Do ebb and flow with tears.   The bark thy body is,    Sailing in this salt flood. The winds thy sighs,    Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,    Without a sudden calm will overset    Thy tempest-tossèd body.   How now, wife?    Have you delivered to her our decree?
For what offence?
Marry, bachelor,    Her mother is the lady of the house,    And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.    I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.    I tell you, he that can lay hold of her    Shall have the chinks.
Biondello, what of that?
And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her.    A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful    I hope my master's suit will be but cold,    Since she respects my mistress' love so much.    Alas, how love can trifle with itself!    Here is her picture: let me see; I think,    If I had such a tire, this face of mine    Were full as lovely as is this of hers:    And yet the painter flatter'd her a little,    Unless I flatter with myself too much.    Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow:    If that be all the difference in his love,    I'll get me such a colour'd periwig.    Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine:    Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.    What should it be that he respects in her    But I can make respective in myself,    If this fond Love were not a blinded god?    Come, shadow, come and take this shadow up,    For 'tis thy rival. O thou senseless form,    Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, loved and adored!    And, were there sense in his idolatry,    My substance should be statue in thy stead.    I'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake,    That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow,    I should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes    To make my master out of love with thee!
Come, come, Ill go burn some sack. 'Tis too late to goto bed now. Come, knight. Come, knight.
Prithee, my king, be quiet. Seest thou here,    This is the mouth o' th' cell. No noise, and enter.    Do that good mischief which may make this island    Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban,    For aye thy foot-licker.
Monday, my lord.
Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.
Therefore he will be, Timon:His honesty rewards him in itself;It must not bear my daughter.
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;    And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,    As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.    Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,    Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:    Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,    The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
I never saw a better-fashioned gown,More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
If thou dost slander her and torture me,    Never pray more. Abandon all remorse.    On horrors head horrors accumulate,    Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed,    For nothing canst thou to damnation add    Greater than that.
Oh, grace! Oh, heaven forgive me!    Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?    God buy you, take mine office. O wretched fool    That lovst to make thine honesty a vice!    O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,    To be direct and honest is not safe.    I thank you for this profit, and from hence    Ill love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.
[within]  Theres wood enough within.
My worthy friends, will you draw near?
Beseech your honourTo make it known to us.
So it is said, my noble lord; but thereforeCame not my friend nor I.
Where's the fool now?
Truly, an obedient lady.I do beseech your lordship, call her back.
Know you the quality of Lord Timon's fury?
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,    how it takes up the shore! but that's not the    point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!    sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the    ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon    swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a    cork into a hogshead.   And then for the    land-service, to see how the bear tore out his    shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said    his name was Antigonus, a nobleman.   But to make an    end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned    it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the    sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared    and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than    the sea or weather.
[to STEPHANO]    I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow.    And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts,    Show thee a jays nest, and instruct thee how    To snare the nimble marmoset.   Ill bring thee    To clustering filberts, and sometimes Ill get thee    Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?
Nor I.
Why then tis hers, my lord, and, being hers,She may, I think, bestow t on any man.
Yes, my lord. More jewels yet!There is no crossing him in 's humour;
Lords, you that here are under our arrest,    Procure your sureties for your days of answer.    Little are we beholding to your love,    And little look'd for at your helping hands.
Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.
We have none such, sir.
Well; what further?
Pray you, put up your dagger and put out your wit.
Why, no. The day had broke    Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,    To send in to your wife.   My suit to her    Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona    Procure me some access.
Adieu, sir.
The commons will not then be satisfied.
How now, my lords!
That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates,    To foster it, nor ever to preserve.    She died at night; I'll say so. Who can cross it?    Unless you play the pious innocent,    And for an honest attribute cry out    'She died by foul play.'
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,    If he appeal the duke on ancient malice;    Or worthily, as a good subject should,    On some known ground of treachery in him?
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder.    His Lordship knows me well, and loves me well.    My lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn    I saw good strawberries in your garden there;    I do beseech you, send for some of them.
[reads]   Fare thee well, and God have mercy upon one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thyself.   Thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy,    Andrew Aguecheek    If this letter move him not, his legs cannot. Ill givet him.
My lords, then, under favour, pardon me,    If I speak like a captain.    Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,    And not endure all threats?   sleep upon't,    And let the foes quietly cut their throats,    Without repugnancy? If there be    Such valour in the bearing, what make we    Abroad? why then, women are more valiant    That stay at home,   if bearing carry it,    And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon    Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,    If wisdom be in suffering.   O my lords,    As you are great, be pitifully good:    Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?    To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust;    But, in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.    To be in anger is impiety;    But who is man that is not angry?    Weigh but the crime with this.
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
Two things are to be done:    My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress.    Ill set her on.    Myself, the while, to draw the Moor apart    And bring him jump when he may Cassio find    Soliciting his wife. Ay, thats the way.    Dull not device by coldness and delay.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Faith, so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating and drinking.
[Aside]  What from Antioch?
I cannot speak, nor think    Nor dare to know that which I know.   O sir!    You have undone a man of fourscore three,    That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,    To die upon the bed my father died,    To lie close by his honest bones:   but now    Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me    Where no priest shovels in dust.   O cursed wretch,    That knew'st this was the prince,    and wouldst adventure    To mingle faith with him!   Undone! undone!    If I might die within this hour, I have lived    To die when I desire.
Oh, sir, Lucentio slipped me like his greyhound,Which runs himself and catches for his master.
You kiss by th book.
There is a fair behavior in thee, captain,    And though that nature with a beauteous wall    Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee    I will believe thou hast a mind that suits    With this thy fair and outward character.    I pritheeand Ill pay thee bounteously    Conceal me what I am, and be my aid    For such disguise as haply shall become    The form of my intent   . Ill serve this duke.    Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him.    It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing    And speak to him in many sorts of music    That will allow me very worth his service.    What else may hap to time I will commit.    Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
Yes.
No man but prophesied revenge for it.
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment:    Ill strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,    Lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow,    When I should mount with wings of victory.    Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.
My lord?
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders    To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me,    And that he does I weep.   Myself am Naples,    Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld    The king my father wracked.
And cross-gartered?
Groan! Why, no. But sadly, tell me who.
Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved mylord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king,    I was a packhorse in his great affairs,    A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,    A liberal rewarder of his friends.    To royalize his blood, I spent mine own.
We would so, and then go a-batfowling.
Ay, sir.
For her, my lord,I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotlessI' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,In this which you accuse her.
Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
The good gods preserve you!
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
How dost, fool?
One seven-night longer.
[aside to  TRANIO  ]  But in the others silence do I seeMaids mild behavior and sobriety.Peace, Tranio.
Oh, villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since I could distinguish betwixta benefit and an injury I never found man that knew howto love himself.   Ere I would say I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I would change my humanitywith a baboon.
Who is my principal?
As much to you, good sister. Whither away?
Beast!
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,    If I have any grace or power to move you    His present reconciliation take.    For if he be not one that truly loves you,    That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,    I have no judgment in an honest face.    I prithee, call him back.
To the Elephant.
Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar.  [he looks in an almanac]  Who saw the sun today?
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.
But saying oer what I have said before.    My child is yet a stranger in the world.    She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.    Let two more summers wither in their pride    Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Even so. How think you of it?
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
Then heavenHave mercy on me!
Ay.
That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
He called her whore. A beggar in his drink Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them. Gentlemen, good een. A word with one of you.
And mine, two hundred.    But though they jump not on a just account    As in these cases, where the aim reports    'Tis oft with differenceyet do they all confirm    A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
Banish us both and send the king with me.
I'll keep you company.
[looking at VIOLA]   Do I stand there? I never had a brother;    Nor can there be that deity in my nature,    Of here and everywhere.   I had a sister,    Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured.    Of charity, what kin are you to me?    What countryman? What name? What parentage?
I could not stay behind you. My desire,    More sharp than filèd steel, did spur me forth.    And not all love to see you, though so much    As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,    But jealousy what might befall your travel,    Being skilless in these parts, which to a stranger,    Unguided and unfriended, often prove    Rough and unhospitable.   My willing love,    The rather by these arguments of fear,    Set forth in your pursuit.
They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.Creditors? devils!
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow;    points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can    learnedly handle,   though they come to him by the    gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns:   why, he    sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you    would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants    to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.
He is much changed.
Ho! who is within there?
May not one speak?
No, no. But all this did I know before.What says he of our marriage? What of that?
[Aside]  Though I am not naturally honest, I am sosometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.   [Taking off his false beard]  How now, rustics! whither are you bound?
Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?
The date is out of such prolixity.    Well have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,    Bearing a Tartars painted bow of lath,    Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,    Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke    After the prompter for our entrance.    But let them measure us by what they will.    Well measure them a measure and be gone.
Ay, defiled land, my lord.
My noble lord
Ay, but, lady,    That policy may either last so long,    Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,    Or breed itself so out of circumstances,    That, I being absent and my place supplied,    My general will forget my love and service.
So are we all.
Why, wherefore ask you this?
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
My voice is now the kings, my looks mine own.
The better for the King of heaven that hath him.
I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath    Prevail not, go and see:   if you can bring    Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,    Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you    As I would do the gods.   But, O thou tyrant!    Do not repent these things, for they are heavier    Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee    To nothing but despair.   A thousand knees    Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,    Upon a barren mountain and still winter    In storm perpetual, could not move the gods    To look that way thou wert.
The heads of the maids?
Beseech you
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulkedand bitumed ready.
O sweet Paulina,Make me to think so twenty years together!No settled senses of the world can matchThe pleasure of that madness. Let't alone.
Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.
Woe the while!O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,Break too.
Well done, my lord.
I stretch it out for that word broad, which, added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight. Since the youthof the counts was today with thy lady, she is much outof quiet.   For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone with him.If I do not gull him into a nayword and make him a common recreation, do not think I have wit enough to liestraight in my bed.   I know I can do it.
Ay, on mine honor.
My lord,
I am woe for t, sir.
Methinks his words do from such passion fly,    That he believes himself. So do not I.    Prove true, imagination, oh, prove true,    That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
Who is that calls so coldly?
We are for law: he dies; urge it no more,On height of our displeasure: friend or brother,He forfeits his own blood that spills another.
Who calls?
So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
Thou hast prevail'd; I pardon them and thee:    Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts.    Come, let us go: we will include all jars    With triumphs, mirth and rare solemnity.
[as CAMBIO]  I read that I profess,  The Art to Love.
I grant you.
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;Look to thy bark: I'll not be long beforeI call upon thee.
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
A thousand pieces.
Why, go to then.    She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,    To seel her fathers eyes up close as oak,    He thought twas witchcraft.   But I am much to blame.    I humbly do beseech you of your pardon    For too much loving you.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse.    For I mine own gained knowledge should profane    If I would time expend with such a snipe    But for my sport and profit.   I hate the Moor,    And it is thought abroad that twixt my sheets    He has done my office. I know not if t be true,    But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,    Will do as if for surety.   He holds me well.    The better shall my purpose work on him.    Cassios a proper man. Let me see now,    To get his place and to plume up my will    In double knavery. How? How? Lets see.    After some time, to abuse Othellos ear    That he is too familiar with his wife.    He hath a person and a smooth dispose    To be suspected, framed to make women false.    The Moor is of a free and open nature    That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,    And will as tenderly be led by th' nose    As asses are.    I have t. It is engendered! Hell and night    Must bring this monstrous birth to the worlds light.
You might do much.What is your parentage?
(  aside  ) O, ay, make up that.He is now at a cold scent.
What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.
Come, let us to the castle.    News, friends! Our wars are done, the Turks are drowned.    How does my old acquaintance of this isle?    Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus,    I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,    I prattle out of fashion, and I dote    In mine own comforts.   I prithee, good Iago,    Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.    Bring thou the master to the citadel.    He is a good one, and his worthiness    Does challenge much respect.   Come, Desdemona,    Once more, well met at Cyprus.
He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!    The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,    And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.    Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;    Bid her send me presently a thousand pound:    Hold, take my ring.
Even when you please, since you will have it so.
I will hear further reason for this.
Methinks I do.
Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord;requesting your lordship to supply his instant usewith so many talents.
(  aside  ) This wins him, liver and all.
[as LUCENTIO]  He is my father, sir, and sooth to say,In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
He shall be none;We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?
My gracious lord,    I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;    In every one of these no man is free,    But that his negligence, his folly, fear,    Among the infinite doings of the world,    Sometime puts forth.   In your affairs, my lord,    If ever I were wilful-negligent,    It was my folly; if industriously    I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,    Not weighing well the end;     if ever fearful    To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,    Where of the execution did cry out    Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear    Which oft infects the wisest:   these, my lord,    Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty    Is never free of.   But, beseech your grace,    Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass    By its own visage: if I then deny it,    'Tis none of mine.
Good morrow, neighbor Gremio.God save you, gentlemen!
All hail, great master! Grave sir, hail! I come    To answer thy best pleasure, be t to fly,    To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride    On the curled clouds. To thy strong bidding, task    Ariel and all his quality.
And may not young men die as well as old?
He is wise,And, on my life, hath stoln him home to bed.
O most insatiate and luxurious woman!
At sea! what mother?
Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we pay for    them.   If there be not a conscience to be used in    every trade, we shall never prosper.
Yet had we not determined he should die    Until your Lordship came to see his end    (Which now the loving haste of these our friends,    Something against our meaning, have prevented),    Because, my lord, I would have had you heard    The traitor speak, and timorously confess    The manner and the purpose of his treasons,    That you might well have signified the same    Unto the citizens, who haply may    Misconstrue us in him, and wail his death.
She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickensas you are. Would we could see you at Corinth!
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
Are you wise?
Art thou afeard?
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
O no, my reasons are too deep and deadToo deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
Ill attend her here    And woo her with some spirit when she comes.    Say that she rail; why then Ill tell her plain    She sings as sweetly as a nightingale.    Say that she frown; Ill say she looks as clear    As morning roses newly washed with dew.    Say she be mute and will not speak a word;    Then Ill commend her volubility,    And say she uttereth piercing eloquence.    If she do bid me pack, Ill give her thanks,    As though she bid me stay by her a week.    If she deny to wed, Ill crave the day    When I shall ask the banns and when be marrièd.    But here she comesand now, Petruchio, speak.
Pretty too.What say you, James Soundpost?
Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.
Who does infect her?
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
Heaven doth truly know it.
For honour's cause, forbear your suffrages:    If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.    Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,    Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease.    A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you to    Forbear the absence of your king:    If in which time expired, he not return,    I shall with aged patience bear your yoke.    But if I cannot win you to this love,    Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,    And in your search spend your adventurous worth;    Whom if you find, and win unto return,    You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.
He thanks your grace; names himself Pericles,    A gentleman of Tyre,    Who only by misfortune of the seas    Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.
'Tis well that thou hast causeBut thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.
I did not give the lie. Out o' your wits and hearing too? A pox o' your bottle! This can sack and drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers!
Your honour knows what 'tis to say well enough.
O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman    Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not    Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish'd:    Thou art not ignorant what dear good will    I bear unto the banish'd Valentine,    Nor how my father would enforce me marry    Vain Turio, whom my very soul abhors.    Thyself hast loved; and I have heard thee say    No grief did ever come so near thy heart    As when thy lady and thy true love died,    Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity.    Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,    To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode;    And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,    I do desire thy worthy company,    Upon whose faith and honour I repose.    Urge not my father's anger, Eglamour,    But think upon my grief, a lady's grief,    And on the justice of my flying hence,    To keep me from a most unholy match,    Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.    I do desire thee, even from a heart    As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,    To bear me company and go with me:    If not, to hide what I have said to thee,    That I may venture to depart alone.
In sooth, you are to blame.
Ha! I like not that.
With naught but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means. The jewels you have had from me to deliver Desdemona would half have corrupted a votaress.   You havetold me she hath received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I find none.
A right good markman! And shes fair I love.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,But the true ground of all these piteous woesWe cannot without circumstance descry.
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
As many vouched rarities are.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,    The letter was not nice but full of charge,    Of dear import, and the neglecting it    May do much danger.   Friar John, go hence.    Get me an iron crow and bring it straight    Unto my cell.
Madam wife, they say that I have dreamedAnd slept above some fifteen year or more.
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well:   he    hath been since an ape-bearer; then a    process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a    motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's    wife within a mile where my land and living lies;    and, having flown over many knavish professions, he    settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.
Stand all apart,And show fair duty to his majesty.
Spoke like an officer! Ha' to thee, lad!
Oh, beware, my lord, of jealousy!    It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock    The meat it feeds on.   That cuckold lives in bliss    Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger,    But, oh, what damnèd minutes tells he o'er    Who dotes, yet doubts suspects, yet soundly loves!
My lord? my lord?
Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself, for what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve.   Butthis is from my commission. I will on with my speech inyour praise and then show you the heart of my message.
A lunatic lean-witted fool,    Presuming on an ague's privilege,    Darest with thy frozen admonition    Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood    With fury from his native residence.    Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,    Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,    This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head    Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
What is t? A spirit?    Lord, how it looks about!   Believe me, sir,    It carries a brave form. But tis a spirit.
Look how he laughs already!
'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,Whom I would imitate: consumption catch thee!
Fool!
I do beseech your majesty, impute his words    To wayward sickliness and age in him:    He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear    As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.
So glad of this as they I cannot be,    Who are surprised withal. But my rejoicing    At nothing can be more.   Ill to my book,    For yet ere supper-time must I perform    Much business appertaining.
Take that, and that.  [stabs CLARENCE]  If all this will not do,Ill drown you in the malmsey butt within.
Most welcome, sir!
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possibleThat love should of a sudden take such hold?
Nay, my troth, I know not. But I know to be up late is to be up late.
Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
What is pourquoi? Do, or not do?   I would I had bestowed that time in the tongues that I have in fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting. O, had I but followed the arts!
You wrong me, Signior Gremio. Give me leave.    I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,    That hearing of her beauty and her wit,    Her affability and bashful modesty,    Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,    Am bold to show myself a forward guest    Within your house, to make mine eye the witness    Of that report which I so oft have heard.    And, for an entrance to my entertainment,    I do present you with a man of mine,    [presenting  HORTENSIO  , disguised as  LITIO  ]    Cunning in music and the mathematics,    To instruct her fully in those sciences,    Whereof I know she is not ignorant.    Accept of him, or else you do me wrong.    His name is Litio, born in Mantua.
But shall I live in hope?
Had our prince,Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'dWell with this lord: there was not full a monthBetween their births.
I go; and towards three or four o'clock Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
So is mine. Do you hear, monster? If I should take a displeasure against you, look you
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year oldI bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird!God forbid! Wheres this girl? What, Juliet!
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia.    I cannot weep, nor answers have I none,    But what should go by water.   Prithee, tonight    Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember,    And call thy husband hither.
If it be that, or any that was hers,It speaks against her with the other proofs.
Ay me!
O woeful time.
It fits when such a villain is a guest. Ill not endure him.
It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.
By this we gatherYou have tripp'd since.
I am sorry for't:    All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,    I do repent.   Alas! I have show'd too much    The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd    To the noble heart.   What's gone and what's past help    Should be past grief: do not receive affliction    At my petition;   I beseech you, rather    Let me be punish'd, that have minded you    Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege    Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:    The love I bore your queenlo, fool again!    I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;    I'll not remember you of my own lord,    Who is lost too: take your patience to you,    And I'll say nothing.
Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep!What dost thou wrap and fumble in thine arms?
Good Paulina,    Who hast the memory of Hermione,    I know, in honour,   O, that ever I    Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,    I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,    Have taken treasure from her lips
Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.
To whom in all this presence speaks your Grace?
A devil, a born devil on whose nature    Nurture can never stick, on whom my pains,    Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost.    And as with age his body uglier grows,    So his mind cankers. I will plague them all,    Even to roaring.
I say amen.
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long    Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?    Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment    Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,    Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke    About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,    Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,    Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.    I am the last of noble Edward's sons,    Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first:    In war was never lion raged more fierce,    In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,    Than was that young and princely gentleman.    His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,    Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;    But when he frown'd, it was against the French    And not against his friends;   his noble hand    Did will what he did spend and spent not that    Which his triumphant father's hand had won  ;  His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,    But bloody with the enemies of his kin.    O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,    Or else he never would compare between.
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.    When have I injured thee? When done thee wrong?    Or thee?Or thee? Or any of your faction?    A plague upon you all! His royal grace,    Whom God preserve better than you would wish,    Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while    But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
Yes.
It gives me wonder great as my content    To see you here before me. Oh, my souls joy!    If after every tempest come such calms,    May the winds blow till they have wakened death,    And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas    Olympus-high, and duck again as low    As hells from heaven!   If it were now to die,    'Twere now to be most happy, for I fear    My soul hath her content so absolute    That not another comfort like to this    Succeeds in unknown fate.
[aside]  Why, so this gallant will command the sun.
And your reports have set the murder on.
[to LANCE]  How now, you whoreson peasant!Where have you been these two days loitering?
Arm, arm, my lord;Rome never had more cause.    The Goths have gather'd head; and with a power    high-resolved men, bent to the spoil,    They hither march amain,   under conduct    Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus;    Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do    As much as ever Coriolanus did.
I do defy thy comminationAnd apprehend thee for a felon here.
Give us some gold, good Timon: hast thou more?
Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast?
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in s tale, by this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.
You that way and you this, but two in company;    Each man apart, all single and alone,    Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.    If where thou art two villains shall not be,    Come not near him.   If thou wouldst not reside    But where one villain is, then him abandon.    Hence, pack! there's gold; you came for gold, ye slaves:
Our late noble master!
What, didst thou offer her this from me?
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,Fatal and ominous to noble peers! Within the guilty closure of thy walls,Richard the Second here was hacked to death,And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes;    You must eat men.   Yet thanks I must you con    That you are thieves profess'd, that you work not    In holier shapes: for there is boundless theft    In limited professions.   Rascal thieves,    Here's gold. Go, suck the subtle blood o' the grape,    Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,    And so 'scape hanging: trust not the physician;    His antidotes are poison, and he slays    Moe than you rob:   take wealth and lives together;    Do villany, do, since you protest to do't,    Like workmen. I'll example you with thievery.    The sun's a thief, and with his great attraction    Robs the vast sea: the moon's an arrant thief,    And her pale fire she snatches from the sun:    The sea's a thief, whose liquid surge resolves    The moon into salt tears: the earth's a thief,    That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen    From general excrement   :   each thing's a thief:    The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power    Have uncheque'd theft. Love not yourselves: away,    Rob one another. There's more gold.   Cut throats:    All that you meet are thieves: to Athens go,    Break open shops; nothing can you steal,    But thieves do lose it: steal no less for this    I give you; and gold confound you howsoe'er! Amen.
Good madam, let me see your face.
Would youd pardon me;    I do not without danger walk these streets:    Once in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys    I did some service, of such note indeed,    That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answered.
Is dead.
Flavius.
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
[aside]    The deep-revolving witty Buckingham    No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels    Hath he so long held out with me, untired,    And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
[aside]  O, peace! And the spirit of humors intimate reading aloud to him!
Put off that gown, Trinculo. By this hand, Ill have that gown.
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.Would none but I might venge my cousins death!
Whats a drunken man like, fool?
I will be mild and gentle in my words.
I have, my liege.
Thy case, dear friend,    Shall be my precedent. As thou gotst Milan,    Ill come by Naples. Draw thy sword.   One stroke    Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest.    And I the king shall love thee.
Ha! Wherefore?
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league With thy embracements to my wifes alliesAnd make me happy in your unity.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,    From off the battlements of yonder tower;    Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk    Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;    Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,    Oercovered quite with dead mens rattling bones,    With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;    Or bid me go into a new-made grave    And hide me with a dead man in his shroud    Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble    And I will do it without fear or doubt,    To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.
Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,I am as poor as you.
Nay, but hear me.
With him? Why, tis not possible.
Ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hathdanced before the king; and not the worst of thethree but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.
How now, my lord?I have been talking with a suitor here,A man that languishes in your displeasure.
Now, Lychorida!
Indeed shes a most fresh and delicate creature.
I am a feather for each wind that blows:    Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel    And call me father?   better burn it now    Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.    It shall not neither.   You, sir, come you hither;    You that have been so tenderly officious    With Lady Margery, your midwife there,    To save this bastard's life,for 'tis a bastard,    So sure as this beard's grey,    what will you adventure    To save this brat's life?
Would it be better, madam, than I am? I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
Hark, hark, you gods!
It is in vain; he will not speak to you.
Gramercy, lovely Lucius: what's the news?
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.    Your plainness and your shortness please me well.    Right true it is your son Lucentio here    Doth love my daughter and she loveth him,    Or both dissemble deeply their affections.    And therefore, if you say no more than this,    That like a father you will deal with him    And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,    The match is made, and all is done.    Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
But well, when I discourse of love and peace?
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:When you cast out, it still came home.
Read the indictment.
I know not.
Gracious my lord,    You know your father's temper:   at this time    He will allow no speech, which I do guess    You do not purpose to him; and as hardly    Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:    Then, till the fury of his highness settle,    Come not before him.
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.
Thats more to me than my wetting. Yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.
Why, how now, daughter Katherine? In your dumps?
[Aside]   She speaks.    O, speak again, bright angel! For thou art    As glorious to this night, being oer my head,    As is a wingèd messenger of heaven    Unto the white, upturnèd, wondering eyes    Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him    When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds    And sails upon the bosom of the air.
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose    You should enjoy were you this countrys king,    As little joy may you suppose in me    That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.
And so in me, and so, I think, in all.    Yet since it is but green, it should be put    To no apparent likelihood of breach,    Which haply by much company might be urged.    Therefore I say with noble Buckingham    That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
I warrant you, madam.
Come, well have him in a dark room and bound. My nieceis already in the belief that hes mad.   We may carry itthus, for our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy onhim,   at which time we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of madmen. But see, but see!
How doth the prince?
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark    By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped.    Hes almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his    son's pranks too;   who, I may say, is no honest man,    neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make    me the king's brother-in-law.
(sings) She loves anotherWho calls, ha?
O, stop there a little!     [Aside]     This is the rarest dream that e'er dull sleep    Did mock sad fools withal: this cannot be:    My daughter's buried.   Well: where were you bred?    I'll hear you more, to the bottom of your story,    And never interrupt you.
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me, It were a grief so brief to part with thee. Farewell.
Apprehend    Nothing but jollity.   The gods themselves,    Humbling their deities to love, have taken    The shapes of beasts upon them:   Jupiter    Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune    A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,    Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,    As I seem now.   Their transformations    Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,    Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires    Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts    Burn hotter than my faith.
This is in thee a nature but infected;    A poor unmanly melancholy sprung    From change of fortune.   Why this spade? this place?    This slave-like habit? and these looks of care?    Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft;    Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot    That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods,    By putting on the cunning of a carper.    Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive    By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee,    And let his very breath, whom thou'lt observe,    Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,    And call it excellent:   thou wast told thus;    Thou gavest thine ears like tapsters that bid welcome    To knaves and all approachers: 'tis most just    That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again,    Rascals should have 't. Do not assume my likeness.
Some devil whisper curses in mine ear,And prompt me, that my tongue may utter forthThe venomous malice of my swelling heart!
If this were played upon a stage now, I could condemn it as an improbable fiction.
Ay, marry, are they, sir.
[within]  Ding-dong.
Sebastian are you?
He seems to be of great authority:   close with him,    give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn    bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show    the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,    and no more ado.   Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'
Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide frommy shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire, good Curtis.
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
Rogue, rogue, rogue!    I am sick of this false world, and will love nought    But even the mere necessities upon 't.    Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave;    Lie where the light foam the sea may beat    Thy grave-stone daily:   make thine epitaph,    That death in me at others' lives may laugh.
I do remember.
I was, but I do find more pain in banishment    Than death can yield me here by my abode.    A husband and a son thou owst to me;     [to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     And thou a kingdom;    all of you, allegiance.    The sorrow that I have by right is yours,    And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
How, Camillo,May this, almost a miracle, be done?That I may call thee something more than manAnd after that trust to thee.
At your request! Yes, nightingales answer daws!
It is the quality o' th' climate.
Heaven restore thee!
Tomorrow will it please you to be crowned?
Go on before. Ill talk with this good fellow.
My liege, one word.
Pardon me, Bianca,    I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed,    But I shall, in a more continuate time,    Strike off this score of absence.   Sweet Bianca,     (giving her DESDEMONAs handkerchief)     Take me this work out.
That shall you know hereafter.
Where art thou, keeper? Give me a cup of wine.
O, 'tis a worthy lord.
[To HORTENSIO]   I pray you, sir, let him go while the humor lasts.   O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding would do little good upon him.   She may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so.Why, thats nothing;   an he begin once, hell rail in his rope tricks.   Ill tell you what sir: an she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face andso disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.   You know him not, sir.
Ill help you, Sir Toby, because well be dressed together.
And left themMore rich for what they yielded.
Good aunt, stand up.
Lucius!What, do we meet together?
An honor! Were not I thine only nurse, I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy teat.
Lead off this ground, and lets make further searchFor my poor son.
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady.Lord, Lord! when twas a little prating thing.Oh, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard,   but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer man.   But, Ill warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin bothwith a letter?
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though    I have for the most part been aired abroad, I    desire to lay my bones there.   Besides, the penitent    king, my master, hath sent for me;   to whose feeling    sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to    think so, which is another spur to my departure.
Then I will give you the serving creature.
(  aside  ) That youths a rare courtier. Rain odors. Well.
Death may usurp on nature many hours,    And yet the fire of life kindle again    The o'erpress'd spirits.   I heard of an Egyptian    That had nine hours lien dead,    Who was by good appliance recovered.
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.    Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so    That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,    If heaven will take the present at our hands.    But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?
Bid her devise    Some means to come to shrift this afternoon.    And there she shall at Friar Lawrence cell    Be shrived and married.   [Gives her coins]   Here is for thy pains.
Thou know'st I have powerTo take thy life from thee.
O excellent device and make a sop of him.
And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.
Were never orphans had so dear a loss.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas!
Where wouldst thou send it?
Send for the county. Go tell him of this.Ill have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,    To stay him from the fall of vanity;    And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,    True ornaments to know a holy man.    Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,    Lend favorable ears to our requests,    And pardon us the interruption    Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
God bless thee, lady!
Fearst thou that, Antonio?
Come, let us leave her;And the gods make her prosperous!
Grandam, his nurse.
If the event o' the journeyProve as successful to the queen,O be't so!As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,The time is worth the use on't.
Please your lordship, here is the wine.
This is the prettiest low-born lass that everRan on the green-sward: nothing she does or seemsBut smacks of something greater than herself,Too noble for this place.
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
So just is God to right the innocent.
Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer.     (to VIOLA)    Your master quits you, and for your service done him,    So much against the mettle of your sex,    So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,    And since you called me master for so long,    Here is my hand.   You shall from this time be    Your masters mistress.
How now! What news from her?
'Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their capsat their money: these debts may well be calleddesperate ones, for a madman owes 'em.
Crying O dear Cassio! as it were. His gesture importsit.
I go. An if you plead as well for themAs I can say nay to thee for myself,No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
Ill do my best    To woo your lady   [aside]   Yet, a barful strife    Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.
What, would you make me mad?   Am not I Christopher Sly, old Slys son of Burton Heath, by birth a peddler, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker?   Ask Marian Hacket, the fat alewife of Wincot, if she know me not! If she say I am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lyingst knave in Christendom.   What!I am not bestraught! Heres
Now the gods keep you old enough; that you may live    Only in bone, that none may look on you!    I'm worse than mad:   I have kept back their foes,    While they have told their money and let out    Their coin upon large interest, I myself    Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?    Is this the balsam that the usuring senate    Pours into captains' wounds? Banishment!    It comes not ill; I hate not to be banish'd;    It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,    That I may strike at Athens. I'll cheer up    My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.    'Tis honour with most lands to be at odds;    Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort.
To prison, till fit timeOf law and course of direct sessionCall thee to answer.
But how camest thou by this ring? At my departI gave this unto Julia.
No, if without more words you will get you hence.
This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod,    And there is in this business more than nature    Was ever conduct of.   Some oracle    Must rectify our knowledge.
[as LUCENTIO]   To save your life in this extremity,    This favor will I do you for his sake    And think it not the worst of all your fortunes    That you are like to Sir Vincentio    His name and credit shall you undertake,    And in my house you shall be friendly lodged.    Look that you take upon you as you should.    You understand me, sir.   So shall you stay    Till you have done your business in the city.    If this be courtsy, sir, accept of it.
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
A match! 'Tis done.
I found it in my chamber,    And he himself confessed but even now    That there he dropped it for a special purpose    Which wrought to his desire.
And so doth mine. I muse why shes at liberty.
(to IAGO)    Disprove this villain, if thou best a man.    He says thou toldst him that his wife was false.    I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain.    Speak, for my heart is full.
We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth,From whence we had our being and our birth.
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me morethan the stripes I have received, which are mightyones and millions.
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown, But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the emperorwith a grace?
I will, sir.
Well, as you guess?
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio, I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrences cell.    There stays a husband to make you a wife.    Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks.    Theyll be in scarlet straight at any news.    Hie you to church.   I must another way    To fetch a ladder, by the which your love    Must climb a birds nest soon when it is dark.    I am the drudge and toil in your delight,    But you shall bear the burden soon at night.    Go. Ill to dinner. Hie you to the cell.
I take thee at thy word. Call me but love, and Ill be new baptized.Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel fathers he! But art thou not advised, he took some careTo get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
If you be she, I do entreat your patienceTo hear me speak the message I am sent on.
And what'sThe sixth and last, the which the knight himselfWith such a graceful courtesy deliver'd?
Madam, you have done me wrong,Notorious wrong.
(  aside  ) Bolts and shackles!
My lord, you know I love you.
Shes like a liar gone to burning hell.'Twas I that killed her.
Why, he shall never wake until the great Judgment Day.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if youhad not taken yourself with the manner.
So they do nothing, tis a venial slip. But if I give my wife a handkerchief
Sir?
They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,    That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot    Do what they would; are sorryyou are honourable,    But yet they could have wish'dthey know not    Something hath been amiss   a noble nature    May catch a wrenchwould all were well'tis pity;    And so, intending other serious matters,    After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,    With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods    They froze me into silence.
Is't possible the world should so much differ,And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,To him that worships thee!
And in good time here comes the sweating lord.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Dear my brother,Let him that was the cause of this have powerTo take off so much grief from you as heWill piece up in himself.
What make you from home? How is t with you, my most fair Bianca?Indeed, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
All things is ready. How near is our master?
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,Tell them there I have gold; look, so I have.
If she be false, heaven mocked itself.Ill not believe t.
The gods defend me!
Not I, believe me. Thus Ill visit her.
Thither, gentle mariner.Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?
Touched you the bastardy of Edwards children?
[as LUCENTIO]  How now, whats the matter?
By my troth, Ill tell thee, I am almost sick for one,  (aside]  though I would not have it grow on my chin.  [To fool]  Is thy lady within?
That would I learn of you,As one being best acquainted with her humor.
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting    Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.    I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall    Now seeming sweet, convert to bitterest gall.
Marry, sir, tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
What money, sir?    For the fair kindness you have showed me here,    And part being prompted by your present trouble,    Out of my lean and low ability    Ill lend you something.   My having is not much.    Ill make division of my present with you.    Hold, theres half my coffer.    (offering him money)
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have nolying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and theyoften give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them forit with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; thereforethey do not give us the lie.
The moon? The sun! It is not moonlight now.
Then patiently hear my impatience.
What noise is this?Not dead? Not yet quite dead?    I that am cruel am yet merciful,    I would not have thee linger in thy pain.    So, so.
He says so, Tranio?
Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.
What, so brief?
I cannot be offended with my trade. Please you to name it.
Earths increase, foison plenty,    Barns and garners never empty,    Vines and clustering bunches growing,    Plants with goodly burden bowing    Spring come to you at the farthest    In the very end of harvest.    Scarcity and want shall shun you.    Ceres' blessing so is on you.
Villain, thou knowst not law of God nor man.No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me. I think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.
Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
I will dispatch you severally; you to Lord Lucius;    to Lord Lucullus you: I hunted with his honour    to-day: you, to Sempronius:   commend me to their    loves, and, I am proud, say, that my occasions have    found time to use 'em toward a supply of money: let    the request be fifty talents.
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother.Then bring me to their sights. Ill bear thy blame And take thy office from thee, on my peril.
And for that offense    Immediately we do exile him hence.    I have an interest in your hate's proceeding;    My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.    But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine    That you shall all repent the loss of mine.    I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.    Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.    Therefore use none.   Let Romeo hence in haste,    Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.   Bear hence this body, and attend our will.  Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,    Further to question me of your king's departure:    His seal'd commission, left in trust with me,    Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel.
I thank you, sir.
Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail    Of any point in't shall not only be    Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,    Whom for this time we pardon.   We enjoin thee,    As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry    This female bastard hence and that thou bear it    To some remote and desert place quite out    Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,    Without more mercy, to its own protection    And favour of the climate.   As by strange fortune    It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,    On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,    That thou commend it strangely to some place    Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
My true Paulina,We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
So is the dearest o' th' loss.
I, that I am one now:    Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,    I'ld give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.    That the whole life of Athens were in this!    Thus would I eat it.
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.
Wherefore did they notThat hour destroy us?
'Faith, by no means; she has so strictly tied    Her to her chamber, that 'tis impossible.    One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery;    This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd    And on her virgin honour will not break it.
And, Norfolk, throw down his.
What means the nun? she dies! help, gentlemen!
This days black fate on more days doth depend.This but begins the woe others must end.
But I much marvel that your lordship, having    Rich tire about you, should at these early hours    Shake off the golden slumber of repose.    'Tis most strange,    Nature should be so conversant with pain,    Being thereto not compell'd.
Nay, that's most fix'd.
Strike on the tinder, ho!    Give me a taper, call up all my people!    This accident is not unlike my dream,    Belief of it oppresses me already.    Light, I say, light!
Go to Ventidius.
Men should be what they seem,Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
She is the fairies midwife, and she comes    In shape no bigger than an agate stone    On the forefinger of an alderman,    Drawn with a team of little atomi    Over mens noses as they lie asleep.    Her wagon spokes made of long spinners legs,    The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,    Her traces of the smallest spiders web,    Her collars of the moonshines watery beams,    Her whip of crickets bone, the lash of film,    Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat,    Not half so big as a round little worm    Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.    Her chariot is an empty hazelnut    Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,    Time out o mind the fairies coachmakers.    And in this state she gallops night by night    Through lovers brains, and then they dream of love;    On courtiers knees, that dream on curtsies straight;    Oer lawyers fingers, who straight dream on fees;    Oer ladies lips, who straight on kisses dream,    Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,    Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.    Sometime she gallops oer a courtiers nose,    And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.    And sometime comes she with a tithe-pigs tail    Tickling a parsons nose as he lies asleep,    Then he dreams of another benefice.    Sometime she driveth oer a soldiers neck,    And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,    Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,    Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon    Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,    And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two    And sleeps again.   This is that very Mab    That plaits the manes of horses in the night    And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,    Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes.    This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,    That presses them and learns them first to bear,    Making them women of good carriage.    This is she
More than mistress of    Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not    At all acknowledge.   For Polixenes,    With whom I am accused, I do confess    I loved him as in honour he required,    With such a kind of love as might become    A lady like me, with a love even such,    So and no other, as yourself commanded:    Which not to have done I think had been in me    Both disobedience and ingratitude    To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,    Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely    That it was yours.   Now, for conspiracy,    I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd    For me to try how: all I know of it    Is that Camillo was an honest man;    And why he left your court, the gods themselves,    Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.
Promise me friendship, but perform none:   if thou    wilt not promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art    a man! if thou dost perform, confound thee, for    thou art a man!
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
Because he should have swallowed me too: and when I    had been in his belly, I would have kept such a    jangling of the bells, that he should never have    left,   till he cast bells, steeple, church, and    parish up again. But if the good King Simonides    were of my mind,
I take no heed of thee; thou'rt an Athenian,therefore welcome: I myself would have no power;prithee, let my meat make thee silent.
[aside]  Well begun, Tranio.
Thomas the earl of Surrey and himself,Much about cockshut time, from troop to troopWent through the army cheering up the soldiers.
Yea, my good lord.
No. Hell say twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
You are too hot.
How now! what's the matter?
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a hare.   His dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity and denying him.   And for his cowardship, ask Fabian.
Ay, marry, what of these?
Ay, my commander. When I presented Ceres,I thought to have told thee of it, but I fearedLest I might anger thee.
Oh, the heavens!    What foul play had we that we came from thence?    Or blessèd was t we did?
Whither wilt thou have me?
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feedMost hungerly on your sight.
I would my tongue could rot them off!
You are a lover. Borrow Cupids wingsAnd soar with them above a common bound.
No, I hear not your honest friend, I hear you.
Titus, I am come to talk with thee.
Why, boy! Why, wag! How now! What's the matter?Look up; speak.
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
What would you with her, if that I be she?
Your Worship is deceived. The gown is made Just as my master had direction.Grumio gave order how it should be done.
Go, fool, and whom thou keepst command.
Iago.
But how did you desire it should be made?
[aside]  Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.
Do you know what you say?
O Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy:    Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours,    A long-tongued babbling gossip? no, lords, no:    And now be it known to you my full intent.    Not far, one Muli lives, my countryman;    His wife but yesternight was brought to bed;    His child is like to her, fair as you are:    Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,    And tell them both the circumstance of all;    And how by this their child shall be advanced,    And be received for the emperor's heir,    And substituted in the place of mine,    To calm this tempest whirling in the court;    And let the emperor dandle him for his own.    Hark ye, lords; ye see I have given her physic,
How now, my sweet Bianca! How now, how now?
From whom?
Yet again? What do you here? Shall we give o'er and drown?Have you a mind to sink?
My lord!
I am all the daughters of my fathers house,    And all the brothers tooand yet I know not.    Sir, shall I to this lady?
Will he woo her? Ay, or Ill hang her.
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his    sworn brother, a very simple gentleman!   I have sold    all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a    ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,    knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,    to keep my pack from fasting:   they throng who    should buy first, as if my trinkets had been    hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:    by which means I saw whose purse was best in    picture; and what I saw, to my good use I    remembered.   My clown, who wants but something to    be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the    wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes    till he had both tune and words;   which so drew the    rest of the herd to me that all their other senses    stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it    was senseless;   'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a    purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in    chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song,    and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this    time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their    festival purses;   and had not the old man come in    with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's    son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not    left a purse alive in the whole army.
Who is t you mean?
Not I. What are you?
How do you, Cassio?Oh, a chair, a chair!
[as VINCENTIO]  Whats he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
Go you before, and I will follow you.
[aside]  Out, devil! I do remember them too well:Thou killedst my husband Henry in the Tower, And Edward, my poor son, at Tewkesbury.
Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I amsworn not to give regard to you. Farewell; and comewith better music.
Even so. An please your Worship, Brakenbury,    You may partake of anything we say.    We speak no treason, man. We say the king    Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen    Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous.    We say that Shores wife hath a pretty foot,    A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue,    And that the queens kindred are made gentlefolks.    How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
I think I can discover him, if you please To get good guard and go along with me.
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
[aside to ARIEL]  Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.
Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.
Be patient. They are friends, Ratcliffe and Lovell.
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee    And wish thee to a shrewd, ill-favored wife?    Thoudst thank me but a little for my counsel;    And yet Ill promise thee she shall be rich,    And very rich.   But thou'rt too much my friend,    And Ill not wish thee to her.
Im out of patience.
What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
I call them forth to credit her.
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.Did you and he consent in Cassios death?
O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.
With all my heart, and much it joys me tooTo see you are become so penitent.Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.
Here comes the fool, i' faith.
I do not like the Tower, of any place.Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
Ay, Timon, and have cause.
I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?
A daughter, and a goodly babe,Lusty and like to live: the queen receivesMuch comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,I am innocent as you.'
If you bethink yourself of any crimeUnreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, Solicit for it straight.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
I thank his Grace. I know he loves me well.    But for his purpose in the coronation,    I have not sounded him, nor he delivered    His gracious pleasure any way therein.    But you, my honorable lords, may name the time,    And in the dukes behalf Ill give my voice,    Which I presume hell take in gentle part.
Two or three groan. 'Tis heavy night,These may be counterfeits. Lets think t unsafe To come in to the cry without more help.
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
Lord Mayor
First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure,What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.  [Exit MAMILLIUS]  Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
Not so hot, good sir:    I come to bring him sleep.   'Tis such as you,    That creep like shadows by him and do sigh    At each his needless heavings, such as you    Nourish the cause of his awaking:   I    Do come with words as medicinal as true,    Honest as either, to purge him of that humour    That presses him from sleep.
Ho, ho, confess'd it! hang'd it, have you not?
She dances featly.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Shes the worse for all this.
Signior Hortensio, twixt such friends as we    Few words suffice.   And therefore, if thou know    One rich enough to be Petruchios wife,    As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,    Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,    As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd    As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,    She moves me not, or not removes at least    Affections edge in me, were she as rough    As are the swelling Adriatic seas.    I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;    If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed;And then with what haste you can get you to bed.
Lead me on.
Now in good time here comes the duke of York.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?    Is Romeo slaughtered, and is Tybalt dead?    My dearest cousin and my dearer lord?    Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!    For who is living if those two are gone?
Alls one. Good Father, how foolish are our minds!If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud meIn one of these same sheets.
Now will I hence about thy business,And take my ministers along with me.
'Tis so, be sure of it.
Good Father, I beseech you on my knees,Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Why, whats the matter? Does he rave?
No, sooth, sir. My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a touchof modesty that you will not extort from me what I am willing to keep in.   Therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express myself.   You must know of me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian, which I called Roderigo. My father was that Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard of.   He left behind him myself and a sister, both born in an hour. If the heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended!   But you, sir, altered that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was my sister drowned.
What stays had I but they? And they are gone.
But to have divinity preached there! did you everdream of such a thing?
First mend my company, take away thyself.
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?
Here, with a cup that's stored unto the brim,    As you do love, fill to your mistress' lips,    We drink this health to you.
Whats this? Whats this?
Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine That they may fairly note this act of mine.
I am at your grace's pleasure.
What is the matter, lady?
Even he, sir. Did you know him?
Gracious Olivia
Happily met, my lady and my wife.
If she'ld do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?
The gain I seek is quiet in the match.
Why let it strike?
That had, give't these fellowsTo whom 'tis instant due. Ne'er speak, or think,That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.
He well may be a stranger, for he comesTo an honour'd triumph strangely furnished.
Will 't hold? will 't hold?
And brief, good mother, for I am in haste.
[Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!
Mark, how strange it shows,    Timon in this should pay more than he owes:    And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels,    And send for money for 'em.
A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave!    Come, Kate, sit down. I know you have a stomach.    Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?    Whats this? Mutton?
I know not.
And came I not at last to comfort you?
[aside to ANTONIO]  The next advantageWill we take throughly.
Go to, thou art made, if thou desirest to be so
Have you scored me? Well.
Son, Ill be your half Bianca comes.
O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce    'Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler    Of Hymen's purest bed! thou valiant Mars!    Thou ever young, fresh, loved and delicate wooer,    Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow    That lies on Dian's lap!   thou visible god,    That solder'st close impossibilities,    And makest them kiss! that speak'st with    every tongue,    To every purpose!   O thou touch of hearts!    Think, thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue    Set them into confounding odds, that beasts    May have the world in empire!
Sweetly in force unto her fair lifes end.
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.    [To his PAGE]   Fetch me my rapier, boy.    What, dares the slave    Come hither, covered with an antic face,    To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?    Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,    To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
No news so bad abroad as this at home:The king is sickly, weak and melancholy,And his physicians fear him mightily.
Why I your purse?
They are, my liege;And stay your coming to present themselves.
Aha! Does she so?
Come, hang them on this line.
No, in good earnest.    How sometimes nature will betray its folly,    Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime    To harder bosoms!   Looking on the lines    Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil    Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,    In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,    Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,    As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:    How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,    This squash, this gentleman.   Mine honest friend,    Will you take eggs for money?
[to ANTONIO]  He receives comfort like cold porridge.
Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up.
What! have I twice said well? when was't before?    I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's    As fat as tame things:   one good deed dying tongueless    Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.    Our praises are our wages:   you may ride's    With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere    With spur we beat an acre.   But to the goal:    My last good deed was to entreat his stay:    What was my first?   it has an elder sister,    Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!    But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?    Nay, let me have't; I long.
Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress' gown for thy masters use!
[as LUCENTIO]  Even he, Biondello.
Know you these two?
Cassio!
The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the    extremity of both ends:   when thou wast in thy gilt    and thy perfume, they mocked thee for too much    curiosity;   in thy rags thou knowest none, but art    despised for the contrary. There's a medlar for    thee, eat it.
No, tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a church-door, but tis enough, twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man.   I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat to scratch a man to death!   A braggart, a rogue, a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic!   Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Why, of mankind.
Now will I to that old Andronicus;    And temper him with all the art I have,    To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.    And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again,    And bury all thy fear in my devices.
Nurse?
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyesFirst hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Yes, if you will, my lord.
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;therefore it behoves men to be wary.
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,For he was great of heart.
O me, O me! My child, my only life,Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!Help, help! Call help.
How now, Marina! why do you keep alone?    How chance my daughter is not with you?   Do not    Consume your blood with sorrowing: you have    A nurse of me. Lord, how your favour's changed    With this unprofitable woe!    Come, give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it.    Walk with Leonine; the air is quick there,    And it pierces and sharpens the stomach.   Come,    Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her.
What if I do not? as, indeed, I do not;    Yet, for I know thou art religious    And hast a thing within thee called conscience,    With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies,    Which I have seen thee careful to observe,    Therefore I urge thy oath;   for that I know    An idiot holds his bauble for a god    And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,    To that I'll urge him:   therefore thou shalt vow    By that same god, what god soe'er it be,    That thou adorest and hast in reverence,    To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up;    Or else I will discover nought to thee.
No, no, hes gone.
Noble sir,If you have told Diana's altar true,This is your wife.
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.  [To BIANCA]  What, do you shake at that?
What would you, Desdemona?
Yon king's to me like to my father's picture,    Which tells me in that glory once he was;    Had princes sit, like stars, about his throne,    And he the sun, for them to reverence;    None that beheld him, but, like lesser lights,    Did vail their crowns to his supremacy:    Where now his son's like a glow-worm in the night,    The which hath fire in darkness, none in light:    Whereby I see that Time's the king of men,    He's both their parent, and he is their grave,    And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
I need not tell him that; he knows you are too diligent.
Minion, thou liest. Is t not Hortensio?
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicionis not without wit and judgment. But, Roderigo, if thouhast that in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than everI mean purpose, courage and valorthis night show it.   If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.
Neighbors, God speed.
Then, noble auditory, be it known to you,    That cursed Chiron and Demetrius    Were they that murdered our emperor's brother;    And they it were that ravished our sister:    For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded;    Our father's tears despised, and basely cozen'd    Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out,    And sent her enemies unto the grave.    Lastly, myself unkindly banished,    The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out,    To beg relief among Rome's enemies:    Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears.    And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend.    I am the turned forth, be it known to you,    That have preserved her welfare in my blood;    And from her bosom took the enemy's point,    Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body.    Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I;    My scars can witness, dumb although they are,    That my report is just and full of truth.    But, soft! methinks I do digress too much,    Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me;    For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.
Not since widow Didos time.
Hortensio, peace. Thou knowst not golds effect.    Tell me her fathers name, and tis enough;    For I will board her, though she chide as loud    As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
You nymphs, called Naiads of the windring brooks,    With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks,    Leave your crisp channels and on this green land    Answer your summons, Juno does command.    Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate    A contract of true love. Be not too late.
Even here undone!    I was not much afeard; for once or twice    I was about to speak and tell him plainly,    The selfsame sun that shines upon his court    Hides not his visage from our cottage but    Looks on alike.   Will't please you, sir, be gone?    I told you what would come of this: beseech you,    Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,    Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,    But milk my ewes and weep.
The violent carriage of it    Will clear or end the business:   when the oracle,    Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,    Shall the contents discover, something rare    Even then will rush to knowledge.   Go: fresh horses!    And gracious be the issue!
The fee simple? O simple!
Dolor comes to him, indeed. You have spoken truer than you purposed.
Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
Are you full of them?
Of all say'd yet, mayst thou prove prosperous!Of all say'd yet, I wish thee happiness!
I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you.   I dare draw as soon as another man if I see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side.
I could marry this wench for this device.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Make your proof.
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.
Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak.    Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,    And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,    Who either by public war or private treason    Will take away your life.    Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,    Till that his rage and anger be forgot,    Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.    Your rule direct to any; if to me.    Day serves not light more faithful than I'll be.
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
But he, poor man, by your first order died,    And that a wingèd Mercury did bear.    Some tardy cripple bear the countermand,    That came too lag to see him burièd.    God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,    Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,    Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,    And yet go current from suspicion.
'Fore heaven, they have given me a rouse already.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.    I will to Venice.   Sunday comes apace.    We will have rings, and things, and fine array,    And kiss me, Kate.   We will be married o' Sunday.
And yet I fear you, for youre fatal then    When your eyes roll so.   Why I should fear I know not,    Since guiltiness I know not. But yet I feel I fear.
An angry brow, dread lord.
None in the world, nor do I know the man.
No, boy, not so; I'll teach thee another course.    Lavinia, come. Marcus, look to my house:    Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court:    Ay, marry, will we, sir; and we'll be waited on.
I think twas Soto that your Honor means.
Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with youthere for the goose?
I cannot tell. The world is grown so bad    That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.    Since every jack became a gentleman,    Theres many a gentle person made a jack.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
No, his mouth is stopped. Honest IagoHath ta'en order for t.
So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubtYou'ld call your children yours.
Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires to speak with you.
Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain. He gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.
No, by my life and soul!Send for the man and ask him.
Help, master, help! here's a fish hangs in the net,    like a poor man's right in the law; 'twill hardly    come out.   Ha! bots on't, 'tis come at last, and    'tis turned to a rusty armour.
Here, here! For heavens sake, help me!
His majesty,Tend'ring my persons safety, hath appointed This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
Long live so, and so die.
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we aregentlemen.
What, ho, Pilch!
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon    When it hath blown his ranks into the air    And, like the devil, from his very arm    Puffed his own brother   and is he angry?    Something of moment then, I will go meet him.    Theres matter in t indeed, if he be angry.
The senators of Athens: happy man!
My fortunesparentagegood parentageTo equal mine!was it not thus? what say you?
'Twas very strange.
O, calm thee, gentle lord; although I know    There is enough written upon this earth    To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts    And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.    My lord, kneel down with me; Lavinia, kneel;    And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope;    And swear with me, as, with the woful fere    And father of that chaste dishonour'd dame,    Lord Junius Brutus sware for Lucrece' rape,    That we will prosecute by good advice    Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths,    And see their blood, or die with this reproach.
How tall was she?
Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of allfashions: you shall fare well; you shall have thedifference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears?
Ha' you done?
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Thanks, noble peer;    The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.    What art thou? and how comest thou hither,    Where no man never comes but that sad dog    That brings me food to make misfortune live?
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.
To satisfy your highness and the entreatiesOf our most gracious mistress.
Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers themadman.  [reads]  By the Lord, madam,
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they shoulddesire to live.
And here he comes.All health, my sovereign lord.
Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes,    My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets,    If yet your gentle souls fly in the air    And be not fixed in doom perpetual,    Hover about me with your airy wings    And hear your mothers lamentation.
Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are?
So stands this squire    Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,    And leave you to your graver steps.   Hermione,    How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome;    Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:    Next to thyself and my young rover, he's    Apparent to my heart.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.    Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires    A sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer,    Much castigation, exercise devout,    For heres a young and sweating devil here,    That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand,    A frank one.
My lord, will't please you to fall to?
Fury, Fury! There, Tyrant, there. Hark, hark!
A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t'    attain to! If thou wert the lion, the fox would    beguile thee; if thou wert the lamb, the fox would    eat three:   if thou wert the fox, the lion would    suspect thee, when peradventure thou wert accused by    the ass: if thou wert the ass, thy dulness would    torment thee, and still thou livedst but as a    breakfast to the wolf:     if thou wert the wolf, thy    greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst    hazard thy life for thy dinner: wert thou the    unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee and    make thine own self the conquest of thy fury:   wert    thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by the horse:    wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the    leopard: wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to    the lion and the spots of thy kindred were jurors on    thy life:   all thy safety were remotion and thy    defence absence. What beast couldst thou be, that    were not subject to a beast? and what a beast art    thou already, that seest not thy loss in    transformation!
A plague upon him, dog!
Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear whatpitiful cries they made to us to help them, when,well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves.
Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none    but friends,    What Roman lord it was durst do the deed:    Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,    That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?
Now, by my mothers son, and thats myself,    It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,    Or e'er I journey to your fathers house.    [To servants]   Go on, and fetch our horses back again.    Evermore crossed and crossed, nothing but crossed!
King, be thy thoughts imperious, like thy name.    Is the sun dimm'd, that gnats do fly in it?    The eagle suffers little birds to sing,    And is not careful what they mean thereby,    Knowing that with the shadow of his wings    He can at pleasure stint their melody:    Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome.    Then cheer thy spirit : for know, thou emperor,    I will enchant the old Andronicus    With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous,    Than baits to fish, or honey-stalks to sheep,    When as the one is wounded with the bait,    The other rotted with delicious feed.
Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
Oh, it is monstrous, monstrous.    Methought the billows spoke and told me of it,    The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder,    That deep and dreadful organ pipe,   pronounced    The name of Prosper. It did bass my trespass.    Therefore my son i' th' ooze is bedded,   and    Ill seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded    And with him there lie mudded.
'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.
The urging of that word judgment hath bred a kind of remorse in me.
I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftilyqualified too, and behold what innovation it makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.
Save you, friend Cassio!
Let all the rest give place.
Then I salute you with this royal title: Long live Richard, Englands worthy king!
Hark! I hear their drum.    Fight, gentlemen of England.Fight, bold yeomen.    Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head.    Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood.    Amaze the welkin with your broken staves
Now, in good time!
Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young soldier, put up your iron. You are well fleshed. Come on.
Sirrah, begone or talk not, I advise you.
O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,Where is my ladys lord? Wheres Romeo?
[t    o  ANDREW   ]  Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
And how does your contentTender your own good fortune?
[sings]      I shall no more to sea, to sea,    Here shall I die ashore     This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a mans funeral.    Well, heres my comfort.    [drinks, sings]      The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I,    The gunner and his mate    Loved Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery,    But none of us cared for Kate.    For she had a tongue with a tang,    Would cry to a sailor, Go hang!    She loved not the savor of tar nor of pitch,    Yet a tailor might scratch her where'ershe did itch.    Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!     This is a scurvy tune too. But heres my comfort.    [drinks]
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;    Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,    Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to moveAnd with her breath she did perfume the air. Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
Noble Timon,What friendship may I do thee?
Royally!Why, it contains no king?
Most grave Brabantio,In simple and pure soul I come to you
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stirKeeps good old York there with his men of war?
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.
Ill go, my lord, and tell him what you say.
O, she that might have intercepted thee,By strangling thee in her accursèd womb,From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done.
[as LUCENTIO]   Then at my lodging, an it like you.    There doth my father lie, and there this night    Well pass the business privately and well.    Send for your daughter by your servant here.    My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.    The worst is this, that at so slender warning    You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
That I did love the Moor to live with him,    My downright violence and storm of fortunes    May trumpet to the world. My hearts subdued    Even to the very quality of my lord.    I saw Othellos visage in his mind,    And to his honors and his valiant parts    Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.    So that, dear lords, if I be left behind    A moth of peace and he go to the war,    The rites for which I love him are bereft me,    And I a heavy interim shall support    By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
My lord, in heart; and let the health go round.
Ay, my good lord.
What is the matter, my lord?
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!    [aside]   My land amounts not to so much in all.    That she shall have, besides an argosy    That now is lying in Marcellus' road.    [To TRANIO]   What, have I choked you with an argosy?
What is the reason of this terrible summons?What is the matter there?
Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should be a fool,   whose skull Jove cram with brains, forhere he comesone of thy kin has a most weak    pia mater.
Her silence flouts me, and Ill be revenged.
Because I would be sure to have all well,To entertain your highness and your empress.
My thanks, sweet madam.
How now! what means death in this rude assault?Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Why, no, sir.
Ill signify so much unto him straight.
There is no world without Verona walls    But purgatory, torture, hell itself.    Hence banishèd is banished from the world,    And worlds exile is death.   Then banishèd,    Is death mistermed. Calling death banishment,    Thou cuttst my head off with a golden ax    And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.
She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify unto her.
This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature,    By night frequents my house.   I am a man    That from my first have been inclined to thrift;    And my estate deserves an heir more raised    Than one which holds a trencher.
Whither?
Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you.I told him you were sick.   He takes on him to understandso much, and therefore comes to speak with you.   I told him you were asleep. He seems to have a foreknowledge ofthat too, and therefore comes to speak with you.   What is to be said to him, lady? Hes fortified against any denial.
Why the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world, and having the world for your labor, tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.
The news I have to tell your Majesty    Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters    Buckinghams army is dispersed and scattered,    And he himself wandered away alone,    No man knows whither.
Not I.
Here comes your father. Never make denial.I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
Madam, I'll sing.
Stay, fellow. I can read.   [He reads the letter]    Seigneur Martino and his wife and daughters;    County Anselme and his beauteous sisters;    The lady widow of Vitruvio;    Seigneur Placentio and his lovely nieces;    Mercutio and his brother Valentine;    Mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters;    My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;    Seigneur Valentio and his cousin Tybalt;    Lucio and the lively Helena.    A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself;    A madman so long, now a fool. What, think'st    That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,    Will put thy shirt on warm?   will these moss'd trees,    That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels,    And skip where thou point'st out? will the    cold brook,    Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste,    To cure thy o'er-night's surfeit?   Call the creatures    Whose naked natures live in an the spite    Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,    To the conflicting elements exposed,    Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee;    O, thou shalt find
[aside]  Odors, pregnant, and vouchsafed. Ill get'em all three all ready.
O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart    Would I were dead, so you did live again!    O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping;    My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.
No, I'll none of you.
Nay, hes a flower. In faith, a very flower.
Death and damnation! Oh!
Anon, anon. Come, let's away. The strangers are all gone.
What does his lordship mean?
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
The gods of Greece protect you!And we'll pray for you.
Yea, noise? Then Ill be brief. O happy dagger,This is thy sheath. There rust and let me die.  [Stabs herself with ROMEOs dagger and dies]
It shall no longer grieve without reproof.
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.
Oh, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
How now, whats the matter? My old friend Grumio and my good friend Petruchio? How do you all at Verona?
Voice and favour!You are, you areO royal Pericles!
Now Margarets curse is fall'n upon our heads,When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I, For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.
Now sleep y-slaked hath the rout;    No din but snores the house about,    Made louder by the o'er-fed breast    Of this most pompous marriage-feast.    The cat, with eyne of burning coal,    Now crouches fore the mouse's hole;    And crickets sing at the oven's mouth,    E'er the blither for their drouth.    Hymen hath brought the bride to bed.    Where, by the loss of maidenhead,    A babe is moulded.   Be attent,    And time that is so briefly spent    With your fine fancies quaintly eche:    What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech.
For the love o' God, peace!
Ah keeper, keeper, I have done those things,    That now give evidence against my soul,    For Edwards sake, and see how he requites me.    O God, if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,    But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,    Yet execute thy wrath in me alone!    O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!    Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile.    My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
My mistress, dearest, and I thus humble ever.
Good Helicane, that stay'd at home,    Not to eat honey like a drone    From others' labours; for though he strive    To killen bad, keep good alive;    And to fulfil his prince' desire,    Sends word of all that haps in Tyre:    How Thaliard came full bent with sin    And had intent to murder him;    And that in Tarsus was not best    Longer for him to make his rest.    He, doing so, put forth to seas,    Where when men been, there's seldom ease;    For now the wind begins to blow;    Thunder above and deeps below    Make such unquiet, that the ship    Should house him safe is wreck'd and split;    And he, good prince, having all lost,    By waves from coast to coast is tost:    All perishen of man, of pelf,    Ne aught escapen but himself;    Till fortune, tired with doing bad,    Threw him ashore, to give him glad:    And here he comes. What shall be next,    Pardon old Gower,this longs the text.
By this our mother is forever shamed.
I am content.
And you, sir, to outlive the age I am,And die as I would do.
Do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
'Tis he. Oh, brave Iago, honest and just,    That hast such noble sense of thy friends wrong!    Thou teachest me.   Minion, your dear lies dead,    And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come.    For, of my heart, those charms, thine eyes, are blotted.    Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lusts blood be spotted.
Prithee, no more; cease; thou know'st    He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure,    When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches    Will bring me to consider that which may    Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.    Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;    For she did print your royal father off,    Conceiving you:   were I but twenty-one,    Your father's image is so hit in you,    His very air, that I should call you brother,    As I did him, and speak of something wildly    By us perform'd before.   Most dearly welcome!    And your fair princess,goddess!O, alas!    I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth    Might thus have stood begetting wonder as    You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost    All mine own follythe society,    Amity too, of your brave father, whom,    Though bearing misery, I desire my life    Once more to look on him.
O, Apemantus, you are welcome.
Save thee, Timon.
Get you all three into the boxtree.   Malvolios coming down this walk. He has been yonder i' the sun practisingbehavior to his own shadow this half hour.   Observe him,for the love of mockery, for I know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of him.   Close, in the name ofjesting!
If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself into stitches, follow me.   Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very renegado. For there is no Christian thatmeans to be saved by believing rightly can ever believesuch impossible passages of grossness.   Hes in yellow stockings.
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think itThat he would steal away so guilty-likeSeeing you coming.
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
I know of none,    Nor know I you by voice or any feature.    I hate ingratitude more in a man    Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness,    Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption    Inhabits our frail blood
Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,    But basely yielded upon compromise    That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:    More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
What say you?
Sir, she is mortal.    But by immortal providence, shes mine.    I chose her when I could not ask my father    For his advice, nor thought I had one.   She    Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan,    Of whom so often I have heard renown    But never saw before,   of whom I have    Received a second life. And second father    This lady makes him to me.
Anon!
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.
Oh, pardon me, twill do me good to walk.
I think it freely, and betimes in the morning I will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I amdesperate of my fortunes if they check me.
No, sir.
Is he won yet?
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,I will stand betwixt you and danger.
Whose tongue?
It may be so, for it is not mine own.Are you at leisure, holy Father, now,Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
In this last tempest. I perceive these lords    At this encounter do so much admire    That they devour their reason and scarce think    Their eyes do offices of truth, their words    Are natural breath.   But howsoev'r you have    Been justled from your senses, know for certain    That I am Prospero and that very duke    Which was thrust forth of Milan,   who most strangely    Upon this shore where you were wracked, was landed,    To be the lord on t.   No more yet of this,    For tis a chronicle of day by day,    Not a relation for a breakfast, nor    Befitting this first meeting.     [to ALONSO]    Welcome, sir.    This cells my court. Here have I few attendants    And subjects none abroad. Pray you, look in.    My dukedom since you have given me again,    I will requite you with as good a thing,    At least bring forth a wonder to content ye    As much as me my dukedom.
I do, my lord, but long I shall not stay there. I shall return before your Lordship thence.
But now, my lord.
Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.
Drunk?
Master, master! News, old news, and such news as you never heard of!
Why, that he didI know not what he did.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes    Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you.    Ah, my mistresses! Which of you all    Will now deny to dance?   She that makes dainty,    She, Ill swear, hath corns. Am I come near ye now?    Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day    That I have worn a visor and could tell    A whispering tale in a fair ladys ear    Such as would please.   Tis gone, tis gone, tis gone.    You are welcome, gentlemen.Come, musicians, play.    [Music plays and they dance]    A hall, a hall, give room!And foot it, girls.    More light, you knaves! And turn the tables up,    And quench the fire. The room is grown too hot.    Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.    Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,    For you and I are past our dancing days.    How long is t now since last yourself and I    Were in a mask?
Beat me?
Nay, do not say, 'stand up;'    Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.'    And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,    'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.    I never long'd to hear a word till now;    Say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how:    The word is short, but not so short as sweet;    No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.
Peter, didst ever see the like?
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!    That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;    This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.    Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,    Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck    Of that proud man that did usurp his back?    Forgiveness, horse!   why do I rail on thee,    Since thou, created to be awed by man,    Wast born to bear?   I was not made a horse;    And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,    Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.
Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
We will ourself in person to this war:    And, for our coffers, with too great a court    And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,    We are inforced to farm our royal realm;    The revenue whereof shall furnish us    For our affairs in hand:   if that come short,    Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;    Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,    They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold    And send them after to supply our wants;    For we will make for Ireland presently.
It gives a very echo to the seatWhere Love is throned.
[to RICHARD]    Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,    I, that was washed to death with fulsome wine,    Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death.    Tomorrow in the battle think on me,    And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair, and die!     [to RICHMOND]    Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster,    The wrongèd heirs of York do pray for thee    Good angels guard thy battle. Live and flourish.
What trumpet is that same?
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
Imprison'd is he, say you?
I go, my lord.
No, my good lord; he speaks the common tongue,Which all men speak with him.
Assurance bless your thoughts!
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,    Were jocund and supposed their states were sure,    And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;    But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast.    This sudden stab of rancor I misdoubt.    Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!    What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
Whose house?
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
Conceives by me? How likes Hortensio that?
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!    Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,    Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue    Which she hath praised him with above compare    So many thousand times?   Go, counselor!    Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.    I'll to the friar, to know his remedy.    If all else fail, myself have power to die.
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad.This is a manold, wrinkled, faded, withered And not a maiden, as thou sayst he is.
I am for thee straight. Take thou the bill, give me thymete- yard, and spare not me.
I am sorry to hear this.
Is that true? Why, then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.
Ay, sooth, so humbledThat he hath left part of his grief with me To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
They are fairly welcome.
Ay, madam.
Arm, arm, my lord. The foe vaunts in the field.
Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.
Oh, fie upon thee, slanderer!
Sit down, sweet niece: brother, sit down by me.    Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury,    Inspire me, that I may this treason find!    My lord, look here: look here, Lavinia:    This sandy plot is plain;   guide, if thou canst    This after me, when I have writ my name    Without the help of any hand at all.
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough,    But riches fineless is as poor as winter    To him that ever fears he shall be poor.    Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend    From jealousy!
Tut, tut!    Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:    I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace'    In an ungracious mouth is but profane.    Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs    Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?    But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march    So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,    Frighting her pale-faced villages with war    And ostentation of despised arms?    Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?    Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,    And in my loyal bosom lies his power.    Were I but now the lord of such hot youth    As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself    Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,    From forth the ranks of many thousand French,    O, then how quickly should this arm of mine    Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee    And minister correction to thy fault!
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me haveSome patient leisure to excuse myself.
Sir, hes rash and very sudden in choler, and haply maystrike at you. Provoke him that he may. For even out ofthat will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but bythe displanting of Cassio.   So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means I shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.
You are resolute, then?
As if it had lungs, and rotten ones.
My husband!
[Reads the epitaph]   'Here lies a    wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft:    Seek not my name: a plague consume you wicked    caitiffs left!    Here lie I, Timon; who, alive, all living men did hate:    Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay    not here thy gait.'    These well express in thee thy latter spirits:    Though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs,    Scorn'dst our brain's flow and those our    droplets which    From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit    Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye    On thy low grave, on faults forgiven.   Dead    Is noble Timon: of whose memory    Hereafter more.   Bring me into your city,    And I will use the olive with my sword,    Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each    Prescribe to other as each other's leech.    Let our drums strike.
Saw you my daughter?
You wish me well.    Being on shore, honouring of Neptune's triumphs,    Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,    I made to it, to know of whence you are.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Doubt it not, worthy lord.
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
I am your own for ever.
Yes, if it please your majesty.
No matter, then, who see it;I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Even in condition of the worst degree,    In gross rebellion and detested treason:    Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come    Before the expiration of thy time,    In braving arms against thy sovereign.
He is our cousin, cousin;   but 'tis doubt,    When time shall call him home from banishment,    Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.    Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green    Observed his courtship to the common people;    How he did seem to dive into their hearts    With humble and familiar courtesy,    What reverence he did throw away on slaves,    Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles    And patient underbearing of his fortune,    As 'twere to banish their affects with him.    Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;    A brace of draymen bid God speed him well    And had the tribute of his supple knee,    With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;'    As were our England in reversion his,    And he our subjects' next degree in hope.
Go to, woman,    Throw your vile guesses in the devils teeth    From whence you have them.   You are jealous now    That this is from some mistress, some remembrance.    No, in good troth, Bianca.
Never, but once.
I bleed still,I am hurt to the death. He dies!
Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a challenge.
A laughter.
He did, from first to last.Why dost thou ask?
Would all those fatterers were thine enemies then,that then thou mightst kill 'em and bid me to 'em!
Nothing, but this is so.
I did, with his contract with Lady Lucy    And his contract by deputy in France;    Th' unsatiate greediness of his desire    And his enforcement of the city wives;    His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,    As being got, your father then in France,    His resemblance being not like the duke.    Withal, I did infer your lineaments,    Being the right idea of your father,    Both in your form and nobleness of mind;    Laid open all your victories in Scotland,    Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace,    Your bounty, virtue, fair humility;    Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose    Untouched or slightly handled in discourse.    And when mine oratory grew toward end,    I bid them that did love their countrys good    Cry God save Richard, Englands royal king!
[Giving money]   There is they goldworse poison to men'ssouls,    Doing more murder in this loathsome world,    Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.    I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.    Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Excepting one, I would he were the bestIn all this presence that hath moved me so.
Gentlemen, there's some of worth would come aboard;I pray ye, greet them fairly.
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.And, madam, there is order ta'en for you;With all swift speed you must away to France.
Because that, like a jack, thou keepst the strokeBetwixt thy begging and my meditation.I am not in the giving vein today.
May it please your honour, Lord Lucius,Out of his free love, hath presented to youFour milk-white horses, trapp'd in silver.
Not so:I am as ignorant in that as youIn so entitling me, and no less honestThan you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant,As this world goes, to pass for honest.
How if it be false, son?
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;    Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.    Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land    Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;    And thou, too careless patient as thou art,    Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure    Of those physicians that first wounded thee:    A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,    Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;    And yet, incaged in so small a verge,    The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.    O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye    Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,    From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,    Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,    Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.    Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,    It were a shame to let this land by lease;    But for thy world enjoying but this land,    Is it not more than shame to shame it so?    Landlord of England art thou now, not king:    Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou
Yon light is not daylight, I know it, I.    It is some meteor that the sun exhales    To be to thee this night a torchbearer,    And light thee on thy way to Mantua.    Therefore stay yet. Thou needst not to be gone.
Believe me, I am not. I tell thee true.
God keep me from false friends, but they were none.
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am    I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast?   Three pound    of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,what will    this sister of mine do with rice? But my father    hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it    on.   She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for    the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good    ones; but they are most of them means and bases;   but    one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to    horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden    pies; mace; dates?none, that's out of my note;    nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I    may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of    raisins o' the sun.
Thou toldst meThou didst hold him in thy hate.
This is strange: methinksMy favour here begins to warp. Not speak?Good day, Camillo.
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What, shall Ibe appointed hours as though, belike, I knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs meand as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
The worlds a huge thing. It is a great price for a small vice.
The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brothers soul being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Madam, yourself is not exempt in this,    Nor you, son Dorset, Buckingham, nor you.    You have been factious one against the other.    Wife, love Lord Hastings. Let him kiss your hand,    And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
My father had a mole upon his brow.
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,    Nor no such men as you have reckoned up,    As Stephen Sly and old John Naps of Greece,    And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell,    And twenty more such names and men as these,    Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
Religion groans at it.
Most veritable, therefore look to t well.
What thinkest thou of his opinion?
Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascallysheep-biter come by some notable shame?
Then certifies your Lordship that this night    He dreamt the boar had razèd his helm.    Besides, he says there are two councils kept,    And that may be determined at the one    Which may make you and him to rue at th' other.    Therefore he sends to know your Lordships pleasure,    If you will presently take horse with him    And with all speed post with him toward the north    To shun the danger that his soul divines.
Art thou a churchman?
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
The more my faultTo scape his hands where I was like to die.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Farewell, Andronicus: Revenge now goesTo lay a complot to betray thy foes.
Come on, assay. Theres one gone to the harbor?
Oh, devil, devil!    If that the earth could teem with womans tears,    Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.    Out of my sight!
[To MARIA]  Bless you, fair shrew.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand, andtis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle;    These quarrels must be quietly debated.    The feast is ready, which the careful Titus    Hath ordain'd to an honourable end,    For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome:    Please you, therefore, draw nigh, and take your places.
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues    A banish'd traitor:   all my treasury    Is yet but unfelt thanks,   which more enrich'd    Shall be your love and labour's recompense.
Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain odors on you!
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow?
By the king.
Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your    money presently.   Wife, take her in; instruct her    what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her    entertainment.
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land,    A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements.    If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea    What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,    Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
Let me entreat you.
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Do you observe this, Hostilius?
Come, sir, I pray you, go.
Here is everything advantageous to life.
God for his mercy! what a tide of woes    Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!    I know not what to do: I would to God,    So my untruth had not provoked him to it,    The king had cut off my head with my brother's.    What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?    How shall we do for money for these wars?  Come, sister,cousin, I would saypray, pardon me.Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some cartsAnd bring away the armour that is there.
Ill do t, but it dislikes me.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
No, not a whit, what. I have watched ere now All night for lesser cause, and neer been sick.
Nay, let me alone for swearing.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace,    Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman.    I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,    And how my men will stay themselves from laughter    When they do homage to this simple peasant.    Ill in to counsel them. Haply my presence    May well abate the over-merry spleen    Which otherwise would grow into extremes.
Madam, here comes my lord.
That which I gave you.
Husband?
Is this the madman?
I think this tale would win my daughter too.    Good Brabantio.   Take up this mangled matter at the best.    Men do their broken weapons rather use    Than their bare hands.
Not at all, good lady:You might have spoken a thousand things that wouldHave done the time more benefit and gracedYour kindness better.
And you must needs bestow her funeral;    The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms:    This done, see that you take no longer days,    But send the midwife presently to me.    The midwife and the nurse well made away,    Then let the ladies tattle what they please.
Wrought he not well that painted it?
Here comes Sir Toby halting. You shall hear more.   But if he had not been in drink, he would have tickled you othergates than he did.
Take the fool away.
My noble lord
Call'd MarinaFor I was born at sea.
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!    Be swift like lightning in the execution;    And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,    Fall like amazing thunder on the casque    Of thy adverse pernicious enemy:    Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.
Abhorrèd slave,    Which any print of goodness wilt not take,    Being capable of all ill!   I pitied thee,    Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour    One thing or other. When thou didst not, savage,    Know thine own meaning,   but wouldst gabble like    A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes    With words that made them known.   But thy vile race,    Though thou didst learn, had that in t which good natures    Could not abide to be with.   Therefore wast thou    Deservedly confined into this rock,    Who hadst deserved more than a prison.
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio? Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
My mind is changed.
Well, let us to the king: there is that in thisfardel will make him scratch his beard.
Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part    To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.    So, now I have mine own again, be gone,    That I might strive to kill it with a groan.
That's a lascivious apprehension.
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion.I do repent me that I put it to you.You would be satisfied?
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,    Because they have been still my adversaries.    But that Ill give my voice on Richards side    To bar my masters heirs in true descent,    God knows I will not do it, to the death.
Is it for him you do envy me so?    Nay, then you jest, and now I well perceive    You have but jested with me all this while.    I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
I faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?
[to TRINCULO]  Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou! I would my valiant master would destroy thee. I do not lie.
Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.
Very sooth, to-morrow.
Hark!
[as LUCENTIO]  I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, lets away.
(  aside  ) A fustian riddle!
Hilloa, loa!
Make that thy question, and go rot!    Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,    To appoint myself in this vexation, sully    The purity and whiteness of my sheets,    Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted    Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,    Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,    Who I do think is mine and love as mine,    Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?    Could man so blench?
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour    Lie at my mercy all mine enemies.    Shortly shall all my labors end, and thou    Shalt have the air at freedom. For a little    Follow, and do me service.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in s hand.    O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart,    And makst me call what I intend to do    A murder, which I thought a sacrifice!    I saw the handkerchief.
Indeed? Is t true?
Make me to see t, or at the least so prove it That the probation bear no hinge nor loopTo hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!
No, my good lord. Therefore be patient.
Young Romeo is it?
Monster, I do smell all horse piss, at which my nose isin great indignation.
But what says Jupiter, I ask thee?
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is halfflayed already.
'Tis very true. Thou didst it excellent.    Well, you are come to me in happy time,    The rather for I have some sport in hand    Wherein your cunning can assist me much.    There is a lord will hear you play tonight;    But I am doubtful of your modesties,    Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior    For yet his Honor never heard a play    You break into some merry passion    And so offend him.   For I tell you, sirs,    If you should smile, he grows impatient.
Come your ways; follow me.
Ill lay fourteen of my teethand yet, to my teen be itspoken, I have but fourshe is not fourteen. How long is it now to Lammastide?
I dare lay any money twill be nothing yet.
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,he'll be made an example.
Pursue him and entreat him to a peace.
Immortal Dian!
What? Strike his wife?
'Faith, that was not so well. Yet would I knewThat stroke would prove the worst!
O Publius, is not this a heavy case,To see thy noble uncle thus distract?
God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,    His deputy anointed in His sight,    Hath caused his death:   the which if wrongfully,    Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift    An angry arm against His minister.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
No, by the Holy Rood, thou knowst it well.    Thou camst on earth to make the earth my hell.    A grievous burden was thy birth to me;    Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;    Thy school days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious;    Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous;    Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,    More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred.    What comfortable hour canst thou name,    That ever graced me in thy company?
Now Ill tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest youmerry!
Nor I neither, by this heavenly light.I might do t as well i' th' dark.
Oh, I am fortunes fool!
There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, whichbears that office, to signify their pleasures.
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound    And crown what I profess with kind event    If I speak true!   If hollowly, invert    What best is boded me to mischief! I    Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world    Do love, prize, honor you.
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you. Soyou may continue and laugh at nothing still.
We were, fair queen,Two lads that thought there was no more behindBut such a day to-morrow as to-day,And to be boy eternal.
Worse and worse, mistress; she has here spoken holywords to the Lord Lysimachus.
What is the matter?
Nurse!
(  aside  ) Pistol him, pistol him.
Lawn as white as driven snow;    Cyprus black as e'er was crow;    Gloves as sweet as damask roses;    Masks for faces and for noses;    Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,    Perfume for a lady's chamber;    Golden quoifs and stomachers,    For my lads to give their dears:    Pins and poking-sticks of steel,    What maids lack from head to heel:    Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;    Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
My leg is cut in two.
[Within]  Servilius, help! My lord! my lord!
He shall see none to fear.
He said the truth. And what said Surrey then?
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.
Why, there they are both, baked in that pie;    Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,    Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.    'Tis true, 'tis true; witness my knife's sharp point.
The king? Whos that?
My lord, I have considered in my mind The late request that you did sound me in.
He that is giddy thinks the world turns roundI pray you, tell me what you meant by that.
On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,You said our work should cease.
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him; I had a Rutland too; thou holpst to kill him.
You witch me in it;    Surprise me to the very brink of tears:    Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes,    And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.
You heard her say herself it was not I.
If there be devils, would I were a devil,    To live and burn in everlasting fire,    So I might have your company in hell,    But to torment you with my bitter tongue!
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     My gracious lady, go,    And thither bear your treasure and your goods.    For my part, Ill resign unto your Grace    The seal I keep; and so betide to me    As well I tender you and all of yours.    Go. Ill conduct you to the sanctuary.
I tell you tis not very well. I will make myself knownto Desdemona.   If she will return me my jewels I will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
He has made too much plenty with 'em;    He's a sworn rioter: he has a sin that often    Drowns him, and takes his valour prisoner:    If there were no foes, that were enough    To overcome him: in that beastly fury    He has been known to commit outrages,    And cherish factions:   'tis inferr'd to us,    His days are foul and his drink dangerous.
O my lord!I would your spirit were easier for advice,Or stronger for your need.
No, my lord, I'll fight.
I had been happy if the general camp,    Pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet body,    So I had nothing known. Oh, now forever    Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!    Farewell the plumèd troops and the big wars    That makes ambition virtue! Oh, farewell!    Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,    The spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife,    The royal banner, and all quality,    Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!    And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats    The immortal Joves dead clamors counterfeit,    Farewell! Othellos occupations gone.
No, my good lord. Therefore mistrust me not.
[as LUCENTIO]  Well, sir, to do you courtesy,This will I do, and this I will advise you.First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high,the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship becleared of the dead.
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,    Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!    Where shall we dine?   O me! What fray was here?    Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.    Heres much to do with hate but more with love.    Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,    O anything of nothing first created!    O heavy lightness, serious vanity,    Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!    Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,    Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!    This love feel I, that feel no love in this.    Dost thou not laugh?
Shes not fourteen.
Bring us to his cave:It is our part and promise to the AtheniansTo speak with Timon.
Nay, by Saint Jamy, I hold you a penny,A horse and a manIs more than oneAnd yet not many.
No, to Whitefriars. There attend my coming.
Marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.
Father, what news? What is the Princes doom? What sorrow craves acquaintance at my handThat I yet know not?
So please you, madam,To put apart these your attendants, IShall bring Emilia forth.
Still so cruel?
My lord?
Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you. Because we come to do you service and you think we are ruffians, youll have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse.   Youll have your nephews neigh to you. Youll have coursers for cousins and gennets for germans.
A gentleman.
Was ever woman in this humor wooed?    Was ever woman in this humor won?    Ill have her, but I will not keep her long.    What, I that killed her husband and his father,    To take her in her hearts extremest hate,    With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,    The bleeding witness of my hatred by,    Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,    And I no friends to back my suit at all    But the plain devil and dissembling looks?    And yet to win her, all the world to nothing! Ha!    Hath she forgot already that brave prince,    Edward, her lord, whom I some three months since    Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewkesbury?    A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,    Framed in the prodigality of nature,    Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,    The spacious world cannot again afford.    And will she yet abase her eyes on me,    That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince    And made her widow to a woeful bed?    On me, whose all not equals Edwards moiety?    On me, that halts and am misshapen thus?    My dukedom to a beggarly denier,    I do mistake my person all this while!    Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,    Myself to be a marv'lous proper man.    Ill be at charges for a looking glass    And entertain a score or two of tailors    To study fashions to adorn my body.    Since I am crept in favor with myself,    I will maintain it with some little cost.    But first Ill turn yon fellow in his grave    And then return lamenting to my love.    Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,    That I may see my shadow as I pass.
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.    Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,    Of these supposèd crimes to give me leave    By circumstance but to acquit myself.
Fear not, Baptista, we will content you. Go to. But I will in to be revenged for this villany.
Come forth, I say! Theres other business for thee.Come, thou tortoise! When?
[reads]  This fail you not to do, as you will
If my hearts dear love
Then we are rid of Litio.
Oh, sweet England!     (sings)      King Stephen was a worthy peer,      His breeches cost him but a crown,      He held them sixpence all too dear,        With that he called the tailor lown.      He was a wight of high renown,      And thou art but of low degree,      'Tis pride that pulls the country down,      Then take thine auld cloak about thee.     Some wine, ho!
The worser that you give me the additionWhose want even kills me.
And may you prove, sir, master of your art.
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,    When thou wert king;   who, travelling towards York,    With much ado at length have gotten leave    To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.    O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld    In London streets, that coronation-day,    When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,    That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,    That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: upwith't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requiresnothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, goodboy, the next way home.
E'en so, sir, as I say.   And, for thy fiction,    Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth    That thou art even natural in thine art.    But, for all this, my honest-natured friends,    I must needs say you have a little fault:    Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I    You take much pains to mend.
He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.
My name is Roderigo.
My pretty cousins, you mistake me both.    I do lament the sickness of the king,    As loath to lose him, not your fathers death.    It were lost sorrow to wail one thats lost.
Very well.
Possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.
Come, come! You talk!
Why, man?
Peace, and be still.
Ay, my lord: and fear    We have landed in ill time:   the skies look grimly    And threaten present blusters.   In my conscience,    The heavens with that we have in hand are angry    And frown upon's.
Where liest o' nights, Timon?
Thou speak'st like him's untutor'd to repeat:    Who makes the fairest show means most deceit.    But bring they what they will and what they can,    What need we fear?    The ground's the lowest, and we are half way there.    Go tell their general we attend him here,    To know for what he comes, and whence he comes,    And what he craves.
Ill see thee hanged on Sunday first.
What is your parentage?    Above my fortunes, yet my state is well.    I am a gentleman.   Ill be sworn thou art;    Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit,    Do give thee fivefold blazon.   Not too fast! Soft, soft!    Unless the master were the man. How now?    Even so quickly may one catch the plague?    Methinks I feel this youths perfections    With an invisible and subtle stealth    To creep in at mine eyes.   Well, let it be.    What ho, Malvolio!
Oh, ho! Do you come near me now? No worse man than SirToby to look to me. This concurs directly with the letter.   She sends him on purpose that I may appear stubborn to him, for she incites me to that in the letter.   Cast thy humble slough, says she. Be oppositewith a kinsman, surly with servants. Let thy tongue tang with arguments of state. Put thyself into the trickof singularity, and consequently sets down the manner how:   as, a sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue,in the habit of some sir of note, and so forth.   I have limed her, but it is Joves doing, and Jove make me thankful!   And when she went away now, Let this fellow be looked to. Fellow! Not Malvolio, nor after my degree, but fellow.   Why, everything adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstancewhat canbe said?   Nothing that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is thedoer of this, and he is to be thanked.
Some wine, ho!     (sings)        And let me the cannikin clink, clink,      And let me the cannikin clink.      A soldiers a man,      A lifes but a span,      Why then let a soldier drink.     Some wine, boys!
Nay, that you shall not. Since you have begun,Have at you for a bitter jest or two!
Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.
If further yet you will be satisfied,Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves,He would depart, I'll give some light unto you.Being at Antioch
Upon what cause?
Well, my good lady.  [aside]  Oh, hardness to dissemble!How do you, Desdemona?
Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory?    [Aside]    I am glad on't with all my heart.    I'll tame you; I'll bring you in subjection.    Will you, not having my consent,    Bestow your love and your affections    Upon a stranger?   who, for aught I know,    May be, nor can I think the contrary,    As great in blood as I myself.    Therefore hear you, mistress; either frame    Your will to mine,   and you, sir, hear you,    Either be ruled by me, or I will make you    Man and wife:    Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too:    And being join'd, I'll thus your hopes destroy;    And for a further grief,God give you joy!    What, are you both pleased?
O Gods lady dear,    Are you so hot?   Marry, come up, I trow.    Is this the poultice for my aching bones?    Henceforward do your messages yourself.
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself.'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
Royal Antiochuson what cause I know not    Took some displeasure at him; at least he judged so:    And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd,    To show his sorrow, he'ld correct himself;    So puts himself unto the shipman's toil,    With whom each minute threatens life or death.
It is: and yours too, Isidore?
But sir, to love concerneth us to add    Her fathers liking,   which to bring to pass,    As I before unparted to your worship,    I am to get a manwhate'er he be    It skills not much, well fit him to our turn    And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa    And make assurance here in Padua    Of greater sums than I have promisèd.    So shall you quietly enjoy your hope    And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
My good Camillo,She is as forward of her breeding asShe is i' the rear our birth.
Is it concluded that he shall be Protector?
He misses not much.
Oh, thats well saidthe chair!    Some good man bear him carefully from hence.    Ill fetch the generals surgeon.    (to BIANCA)    For you, mistress,    Save you your labor.He that lies slain here, Cassio,    Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
Where be these knaves?   What, no man at door    To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!    Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
O, that must be    I' the virtue of your daughter:   one being dead,    I shall have more than you can dream of yet;    Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,    Contract us 'fore these witnesses.
O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.
That Ill try.
Dost dialogue with thy shadow?
I know thee well;But in thy fortunes am unlearn'd and strange.
By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly over me. The malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours.   Therefore I shall crave of you your leave that I may bear my evils alone. It   were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you.
An offer, uncle, that we will accept:    But we must win your grace to go with us    To Bristol castle, which they say is held    By Bushy, Bagot and their complices,    The caterpillars of the commonwealth,    Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
I must eat my dinner.    This islands mine, by Sycorax my mother,    Which thou takest from me.   When thou camest first,    Thou strokst me and made much of me, wouldst give me    Water with berries in t,   and teach me how    To name the bigger light, and how the less,    That burn by day and night.   And then I loved thee    And showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle,    The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile.    Cursed be I that did so! All the charms    Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!    For I am all the subjects that you have,    Which first was mine own king.   And here you sty me    In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me    The rest o' th' island.
That nature, being sick of man's unkindness,Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou,
She conjures: away with her! Would she had never    come within my doors! Marry, hang you! She's born    to undo us.   Will you not go the way of women-kind?    Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!
Now, sir, what is your text?
Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
'Tis a villain, sir,I do not love to look on.
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.
To th' platform, masters. Come, lets set the watch.
Search the market narrowly; Mytilene is full ofgallants. We lost too much money this mart by beingtoo wenchless.
An hour before I came, the duchess died.
Is t possible?
Bear her my true loves kiss; and so, farewell.
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain. Well are you welcome to the open air.How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?
Sorrow and grief of heart    Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man    Yet he is come.
[Giving her a ring]  O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight, And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Shes a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me. Whato' that?
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.    He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.    I am no pilot. Yet, wert thou as far    As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,    I would adventure for such merchandise.
[Aside to GREGORY]   Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Her husband, sirrah?
And I as I love Hastings with my heart.
Moved, in good time. Let him that moved you hitherRemove you hence. I knew you at the firstYou were a moveable.
Good my lord,She came from Libya.
A pair of stocks, you rogue!
Before the days of change, still is it so.    By a divine instinct, mens minds mistrust    Ensuing dangers,   as by proof we see    The water swell before a boist'rous storm.    But leave it all to God. Whither away?
I would you were as I would have you be!
Go to. Where lodges he?
I did not, sir:These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,Can clear me in't.
Hail, worthy Timon!
[as LITIO]  Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said, Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.  They stand aside
Why, that was he.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Heres Romeos man. We found him in the churchyard.
O, well said, Lucius!Good boy, in Virgo's lap; give it Pallas.
Alack, for pity!    I, not remembering how I cried out then,    Will cry it o'er again. It is a hint    That wrings mine eyes to t.
Sir,    Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king;    A man who for this three months hath not spoken    To any one, nor taken sustenance    But to prorogue his grief.
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.    I was too hot to do somebody good    That is too cold in thinking of it now.    Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;    He is franked up to fatting for his pains.    God pardon them that are the cause thereof.
Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for    your oration;   and let him deliver the pigeons to    the emperor from you.
I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' the ass.
But amongst honest women.
How now?
I thought she had some great matter there in hand;for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, eversince the death of Hermione, visited that removedhouse. Shall we thither and with our company piecethe rejoicing?
Why, they stay at door, sir.
Madam, we'll play at bowls.
Either thou wilt die by Gods just ordinance    Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,    Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish    And nevermore behold thy face again.    Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse,    Which in the day of battle tire thee more    Than all the complete armor that thou wearst.    My prayers on the adverse party fight,    And there the little souls of Edwards children    Whisper the spirits of thine enemies    And promise them success and victory.    Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end.    Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
Because my name is George.
[Skims the letter]   This letter doth make good the friars words,    Their course of love, the tidings of her death.    And here he writes that he did buy a poison    Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal    Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.    Where be these enemies?Capulet! Montague!    See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,    That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!    And I, for winking at your discords, too    Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.
Why, man?
Taurus! Thats sides and heart.
What wouldst thou have to Athens?
Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is;    For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:    Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?
Mercutio, thou consortst with Romeo.
Come on, then,And give't me in mine ear.
A thousand more mischances than this oneHave learn'd me how to brook this patiently.
What is a whoremaster, fool?
To-night, to-night. But, mistress, do you know theFrench knight that cowers i' the hams?
I have said too much unto a heart of stone    And laid mine honor too unchary on t.    Theres something in me that reproves my fault,    But such a headstrong potent fault it is    That it but mocks reproof.
(  aside  ) Fie on him, Jezebel!
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,    Doth not thy embassage belong to me,    And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st    To serve me last, that I may longest keep    Thy sorrow in my breast.   Come, ladies, go,    To meet at London London's king in woe.    What, was I born to this, that my sad look    Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?    Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,    Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
Hold, for your lives!
[Aside]  If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.
I pray now, keep below.
'Tis his description.
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
Go hence. Good night. And here stands all your state:    Either be gone before the watch be set,    Or by the break of day disguised from hence.    Sojourn in Mantua. Ill find out your man,    And he shall signify from time to time    Every good hap to you that chances here.    Give me thy hand. Tis late. Farewell, good night.
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
Look back! Defend thee! Here are enemies.
Hail, reverend sir! the gods preserve you!
All for our vantage. Then, in Gods name, march.True hope is swift, and flies with swallows wings.Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
[to RODERIGO]     Farewell, for I must leave you.    It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place,    To be producted (as, if I stay, I shall)    Against the Moor.   For I do know the state    (However this may gall him with some check)    Cannot with safety cast him,   for hes embarked    With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars    (Which even now stand in act) that, for their souls,    Another of his fathom they have none    To lead their business.   In which regard,    Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,    Yet for necessity of present life    I must show out a flag and sign of love,    (Which is indeed but sign).   That you shall surely find him,    Lead to the Sagittary the raisèd search,    And there will I be with him. So farewell.
No cock of mine. You crow too like a craven.
Ay. Would you had never seen him!
[to ALONSO, ANTONIO, and SEBASTIAN]     You are three men of sin, whom Destiny,    That hath to instrument this lower world    And what is in t, the never-surfeited sea    Hath caused to belch up you   and on this island    Where man doth not inhabit, you mongst men    Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad,    And even with suchlike valor men hang and drown    Their proper selves.     [ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO draw their swords]     You fools, I and my fellows    Are ministers of fate.   The elements    Of whom your swords are tempered may as well    Wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs    Kill the still-closing waters as diminish    One dowl thats in my plume.   My fellow ministers    Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt,    Your swords are now too massy for your strengths    And will not be uplifted. But remember    For thats my business to youthat you three    From Milan did supplant good Prospero,    Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it,    Him and his innocent child.   For which foul deed    The powersdelaying, not forgettinghave    Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures,    Against your peace.   Thee of thy son, Alonso,    They have bereft, and do pronounce by me    Lingering perdition, worse than any death    Can be at once, shall step by step attend    You and your ways;   whose wraths to guard you from    Which here, in this most desolate isle, else falls    Upon your headsis nothing but hearts' sorrow    And a clear life ensuing.
How came we ashore?
Tybalt here slain, whom Romeos hand did slay.    Romeo, that spoke him fair, bade him bethink    How nice the quarrel was and urged withal    Your high displeasure.   All this uttered    With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed,    Could not take truce with the unruly spleen    Of Tybalt deaf to peace,   but that he tilts    With piercing steel at bold Mercutios breast,    Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,    And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats    Cold death aside and with the other sends    It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,    Retorts it.   Romeo, he cries aloud,    Hold, friends! Friends, part! and, swifter than his tongue,    His agile arm beats down their fatal points,    And twixt them rushesunderneath whose arm    An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life    Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.    But by and by comes back to Romeo,    Who had but newly entertained revenge,    And to t they go like lightning, for ere I    Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain.    And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.    This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
The ditty does remember my drowned father.    This is no mortal business, nor no sound    That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.
Let's have some merry ones.
O, shut the door! And when thou hast done so,Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help.
Oh, me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?
Signior Lodovico?
A charitable wish and full of love.
And she is fair too, is she not?
[To MARINA]  Come your ways. My masters, you sayshe's a virgin?
Tell me not, Friar, that thou hearst of this,    Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.    If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,    Do thou but call my resolution wise,    And with this knife Ill help it presently.    [Shows him a knife]    God joined my heart and Romeos, thou our hands.    And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo sealed,    Shall be the label to another deed,    Or my true heart with treacherous revolt    Turn to another, this shall slay them both.    Therefore out of thy long-experienced time,    Give me some present counsel, or, behold,    Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife    Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that    Which the commission of thy years and art    Could to no issue of true honor bring.    Be not so long to speak. I long to die    If what thou speakst speak not of remedy.
If thou beest Trinculo, come forth. Ill pull thee by the lesser legs. If any be Trinculos legs, these are they.    [pulls TRINCULO out from under the gaberdine]      Thouart very Trinculo indeed! How camest thou to be the siege of this mooncalf? Can he vent Trinculos?
Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,    Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips:    O were the sum of these that I should pay    Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!
Heres one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Is t even so?
[as VINCENTIO]  Away, away, mad ass! His name is Lucentio and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.
Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.
How is t, brother!
What we will do, we do upon command.
Husband, lets follow to see the end of this ado.
For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shallsee a rose; and she were a rose indeed, if she had but
Honest! good fellow, what's that? If it be a dayfits you, search out of the calendar, and nobodylook after it.
Why, uncle, tis a shame.
And further he desires to know of you,Of whence you are, your name and parentage.
Amen.
See not your bride in these unreverent robes.Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
Some loving friends convey the emperor hence,    And give him burial in his father's grave:    My father and Lavinia shall forthwith    Be closed in our household's monument.    As for that heinous tiger, Tamora,    No funeral rite, nor man in mourning weeds,    No mournful bell shall ring her burial;    But throw her forth to beasts and birds of prey:    Her life was beast-like, and devoid of pity;    And, being so, shall have like want of pity.    See justice done on Aaron, that damn'd Moor,    By whom our heavy haps had their beginning:    Then, afterwards, to order well the state,    That like events may ne'er it ruinate.
Stanley, look to your wife. If she conveyLetters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.
Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?
You bid me make it orderly and well, According to the fashion and the time.
What villain, madam?
[Aside]  For all this same, Ill hide me hereabout. His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Despise me    If I do not. Three great ones of the city    (In personal suit to make me his lieutenant)    Off-capped to him, and by the faith of man    I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.    But he (as loving his own pride and purposes)    Evades them with a bombast circumstance    Horribly stuffed with epithets of war,    And in conclusion    Nonsuits my mediators.   For Certes, says he,    I have already chose my officer.    And what was he?    Forsooth, a great arithmetician,    One Michael Cassio, a Florentine    A fellow almost damned in a fair wife    That never set a squadron in the field,    Nor the division of a battle knows    More than a spinsterunless the bookish theoric,    Wherein the toged consuls can propose    As masterly as he.   Mere prattle without practice    Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th' election    And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof    At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds    Christian and heathen,   must be beleed and calmed    By debitor and creditor. This counter-caster    He (in good time) must his lieutenant be    And I, bless the mark, his Moorships ancient.
I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?
Take not, good cousin, further than you should.Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes    Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.    He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,    I am a child to chiding.
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
He lives that loves thee better than he could.
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.
[To MARINA]    Pray you, come hither awhile. You    have fortunes coming upon you.   Mark me: you must    seem to do that fearfully which you commit    willingly, despise profit where you have most gain.    To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your    lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good    opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.
And Trinculo is reeling ripe. Where should they    Find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em?    How camest thou in this pickle?
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.
Come on, I say, and first begin with her.
Sir, no. His indignation derives itself out of a very competent injury. Therefore get you on and give him his desire.   Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with me which with as much safety you might answer him.   Therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked, for meddle you must, thats certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
My man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack. For my part, the sea cannot drown me.   I swam, ere I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
Oh Iago!
Something from Cyprus as I may divine.    It is a business of some heat. The galleys    Have sent a dozen sequent messengers    This very night at one anothers heels,    And many of the consuls, raised and met,    Are at the Dukes already. You have been hotly called for.    When being not at your lodging to be found    The Senate hath sent about three several guests    To search you out.
Come, my Marina.
Anon!
Thou common friend, that's without faith or love,    For such is a friend now; treacherous man!    Thou hast beguiled my hopes; nought but mine eye    Could have persuaded me: now I dare not say    I have one friend alive; thou wouldst disprove me.    Who should be trusted, when one's own right hand    Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,    I am sorry I must never trust thee more,    But count the world a stranger for thy sake.    The private wound is deepest: O time most accurst,    'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
Orsino.
[aside]  Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.
In him there is a hope of government,    Which, in his nonage, council under him,    And, in his full and ripened years, himself,    No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
Why, didst thou not come from heaven?
Had it pleased heaven    To try me with affliction, had they rained    All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head,    Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,    Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,    I should have found in some place of my soul    A drop of patience.   But, alas, to make me    The fixèd figure for the time of scorn    To point his slow and moving finger at!    Yet could I bear that too, well, very well.    But there where I have garnered up my heart,    Where either I must live or bear no life,    The fountain from the which my current runs    Or else dries upto be discarded thence!    Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads    To knot and gender in!   Turn thy complexion there,    Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,    Ay, there, look grim as hell!
[To BAPTISTA]  I pray you, sir, is it your willTo make a stale of me amongst these mates?
Come, gentlemen,Let us consult upon tomorrows businessInto my tent. The dew is raw and cold.
Princes, it is too late to talk of love;    And that's the mark I know you level at:    Therefore each one betake him to his rest;    To-morrow all for speeding do their best.
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.
Very well, go to! I cannot go to, man, nor tis not very well. Nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible
[aside to SEBASTIAN]  I am right glad that hes so out of hope.Do not, for one repulse, forego the purposeThat you resolved t' effect.
If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness. If thou beest a devil, take t as thou list.
Why, this was molded on a porringer!    A velvet dish! Fie, fie, tis lewd and filthy!    Why, tis a cockle or a walnut shell,    A knack, a toy, a trick, a babys cap.    Away with it! Come, let me have a bigger.
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to    rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear    open.   He was torn to pieces with a bear: this    avouches the shepherd's son;   who has not only his    innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a    handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.
O that ever I was born!
What is thy name?   and wherefore comest thou hither,    Before King Richard in his royal lists?    Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel?    Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
Go, sirrah, take them to the butteryAnd give them friendly welcome every one. Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yellAs when, by night and negligence, the fireIs spied in populous cities.
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
The old cock.
By break of day, if the wind cease.
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,    Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other    Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom.    If any wretch have put this in your head    Let heaven requite it with the serpents curse    For if she be not honest, chaste, and true    Theres no man happy. The purest of their wives    Is foul as slander.
My lords, with all the humbleness I may,    I greet your honours from Andronicus.     [Aside]       And pray the Roman gods confound you both!
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.
Well, girl, thou weepst not so much for his death,As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
That were hard to compass,Because she will admit no kind of suit,No, not the dukes.
There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,    Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard;    And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour;    None else of name and noble estimate.
The woe's to come; the children yet unborn.Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
Hark!
Is not this he?
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio.  [To  TRANIO  as  LUCENTIO  ]  But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger. May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
'Tis better, sir, to be brief than tedious.Let him seeour commission, and talk no more.
You look as if you held a brow of much distractionAre you moved, my lord?
I do not always follow lover, elder brother andwoman; sometime the philosopher.
This is the monkeys own giving out. She is persuaded Iwill marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.
Oh, yes, and went between us very oft.
Help, mistress, help! My master is mad.
Grace to boot!    Of this make no conclusion, lest you say    Your queen and I are devils:   yet go on;    The offences we have made you do we'll answer,    If you first sinn'd with us and that with us    You did continue fault and that you slipp'd not    With any but with us.
If thou dost I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly gentleman!
Is it true too, think you?
What was his reason?He was not so resolved when last we spake together.
Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed!
Look in upon me then and speak with me, Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
Fear me not.
Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning    To raze one title of your honour out:    To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,    From the most gracious regent of this land,    The Duke of York,   to know what pricks you on    To take advantage of the absent time    And fright our native peace with self-born arms.
[From within]  Madam!
No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you. I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.
[To PETRUCHIO]  You are too blunt. Go to it orderly.
I promised we would be contributorsAnd bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
Slave!
You cannot make gross sins look clear:To revenge is no valour, but to bear.
Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answerthee profitably.
Master, for my hand,Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Lady, you know no rules of charity,Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.
We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore,A portly sail of ships make hitherward.
Calls my lord?
Do you quarrel, sir?
Where are they?
Where is he?
What say you to a neats foot?
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moor, butfor bragging and telling her fantastical lies. To love him still for prating?   Let not thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed, and what delight shall she haveto look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be a game to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, manners and beauties.   All which the Moor is defective in. Now for want of these required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will finditself abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor. Very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some second choice.     Now sir, this grantedas it is a most pregnant and unforced positionwho stands so eminent in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble, no furtherconscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most hidden loose affection.   Why, none, why, none! A slipper and subtle knave, a finder of occasions that has an eye, can stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself. A devilish knave.   Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. A pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.
Good fool, help me to some light and some paper. I tellthee, I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed.    And therefore, setting all this chat aside,    Thus in plain terms:   your father hath consented    That you shall be my wife, your dowry 'greed on,    And, will you, nill you, I will marry you.    Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn,    For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,    Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,    Thou must be married to no man but me.    For I am he am born to tame you, Kate,    And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate    Conformable as other household Kates.
No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court,    Broken his staff of office and dispersed    The household of the king.
Nay, I will give thee a kiss.  [kisses him]  Now pray thee, love, stay.
Were I like thee, I'ld throw away myself.
What horrible fancys this?
[reads]  Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for t.
O me unhappy!
The pox on such antic, lisping, affecting fantasmines, these new tuners of accents! By Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good whore!   Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardon mes,   who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the oldbench? Oh, their bones, their bones!
All three of them are desperate. Their great guilt,    Like poison given to work a great time after,    Now 'gins to bite the spirits.   I do beseech you    That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly    And hinder them from what this ecstasy    May now provoke them to.
[To OLIVIA]   So comes it, lady, you have been mistook.    But nature to her bias drew in that.    You would have been contracted to a maid;    Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived.    You are betrothed both to a maid and man.
Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
May we see them?
Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
I cannot tell. But I had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross every morning.
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.
Oh, blood, blood, blood!
Stay, madam. I must talk a word with you.
Nay, thats certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
Come, come, you're drunk.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?Turn thee, Benvolio. Look upon thy death.
One Varro's servant, my good lord,
I will not charm my tongue, I am bound to speak.My mistress here lies murdered in her bed
True.    And look how well my garments sit upon me,    Much feater than before.   My brothers servants    Were then my fellows. Now they are my men.
How now! What do you here alone?
You say you do not know the ladys mind. Uneven is the course. I like it not.
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
No, unpin me here.This Lodovico is a proper man.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady
Because the girl should not survive her shame,And by her presence still renew his sorrows.
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would    not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am    courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means    to do the prince my master good;   which who knows how    that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring    these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him:   if he    think it fit to shore them again and that the    complaint they have to the king concerns him    nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far    officious; for I am proof against that title and    what shame else belongs to't.   To him will I present    them: there may be matter in it.
Alive in triumphand Mercutio slain!    Away to heaven, respective lenity,    And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.    Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again    That late thou gavest me, for Mercutios soul    Is but a little way above our heads,    Staying for thine to keep him company.    Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Truly, I think they are.
[as LUCENTIO]  No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two, The one as famous for a scolding tongueAs is the other for beauteous modesty.
And how does that honourable, complete, free-heartedgentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lordand master?
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest    Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.    A greater power than we can contradict    Hath thwarted our intents.   Come, come away.    Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,    And Paris too. Come, Ill dispose of thee    Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.    Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.    Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
'Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir; which, in my    lord's behalf, I come to entreat your honour to    supply;   who, having great and instant occasion to    use fifty talents, hath sent to your lordship to    furnish him, nothing doubting your present    assistance therein.
Is all things ready for the royal time?
Hear a little further    And then Ill bring thee to the present business    Which now s upon s,   without the which this story    Were most impertinent.
You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than adinner of friends.
Let her have your voice.    Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not    To please the palate of my appetite,    Nor to comply with heat the young affects    In my defunct and proper satisfaction,    But to be free and bounteous to her mind,    And heaven defend your good souls, that you think    I will your serious and great business scant    When she is with me.   No, when light-winged toys    Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness    My speculative and officed instrument,    That my disports corrupt and taint my business,    Let housewives make a skillet of my helm    And all indign and base adversities    Make head against my estimation.
Madam, and nothing else. So lords call ladies.
O, do not swear!Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
In Gods name, what art thou?
Ha! now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master.
Art thou my son?
What, not to pray?
What, I say?    My foot my tutor?   Put thy sword up, traitor,    Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience    Is so possessed with guilt.   Come from thy ward,    For I can here disarm thee with this stick    And make thy weapon drop.
How now, good Cassio, whats the news with you?
And I, most jocund, apt, and willingly,To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
Get fire and meat for these poor men:'T has been a turbulent and stormy night.
[as LUCENTIO]  Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio.
And did they so?
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
Unmannered dog, stand thou when I command!    Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,    Or by Saint Paul Ill strike thee to my foot    And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,And then pursue me as you draw your bow.You are welcome all.
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
O Paulina,    We honour you with trouble:   but we came    To see the statue of our queen: your gallery    Have we pass'd through, not without much content    In many singularities;   but we saw not    That which my daughter came to look upon,    The statue of her mother.
Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?    These tidings nip me, and I hang the head    As flowers with frost or grass beat down with storms:    Ay, now begin our sorrows to approach:    'Tis he the common people love so much;    Myself hath often over-heard them say,    When I have walked like a private man,    That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,    And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor.
And what of him, Tranio?
Oh, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,    That quicken even with blowing.   O thou weed,    Who art so lovely fair and smellst so sweet    That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!
Well, I will go;But yet I have no desire to it.
Ay, my good lord, and she accepts of it.
One from the Lord Stanley.
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.    Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have    A dram of poison,   such soon-speeding gear    As will disperse itself through all the veins    That the life-weary taker may fall dead,    And that the trunk may be discharged of breath    As violently as hasty powder fired    Doth hurry from the fatal cannons womb.
I humbly thank your ladyship.
Will I live?
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself to mar.
Bounteous madam,Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,Hes never anything but your true servant.
Tush, Gremio. Though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellowsin the world,   an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.
This is, to give a dog and in recompense desire my dogagain.
Here's my lord.
Alas!
O serpent heart hid with a flowering face!    Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?    Beautiful tyrant! Fiend angelical!    Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!    Despisèd substance of divinest show,    Just opposite to what thou justly seemst.    A damnèd saint, an honorable villain!    O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell    When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend    In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?    Was ever book containing such vile matter    So fairly bound? Oh, that deceit should dwell    In such a gorgeous palace!
What dost thou say?
And here I take the like unfeignèd oathNever to marry with her, though she would entreat.Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!
I would your duty were as foolish too.The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,Hath cost me an hundred crowns since suppertime.
Let him be the devil, an he will, I care not. Give me faith, say I. Well, its all one.
Cold friends to me. What do they in the northWhen they should serve their sovereign in the west?
Let him do his spite.    My services which I have done the signiory    Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know    Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,    I shall promulgate.   I fetch my life and being    From men of royal siege, and my demerits    May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune    As this that I have reached.   For know, Iago,    But that I love the gentle Desdemona,    I would not my unhousèd free condition    Put into circumscription and confine    For the seas worth. But look, what lights come yond?
Why, I said nothing.
Your napkin is too little,Let it alone.
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
Tut, duns the mouse, the constables own word.    If thou art dun, well draw thee from the mire,    Orsave your reverencelove, wherein thou stickst    Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
O Romeo, Romeo! Wherefore art thou Romeo?    Deny thy father and refuse thy name.    Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,    And Ill no longer be a Capulet.
Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valor. Challenge me the counts youth to fight with him.   Hurt him in eleven places. My niece shall take note of it,   and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in mans commendation with woman than report of valor.
I thank thee. Thou shalt not lose by it.
My business, sir, is to the king.
Before the time be out? No more!
Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. Oh, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.
Prithee, be not sad,Thou art true and honest; ingeniously I speak.No blame belongs to thee.
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
But that the poor monsters in drink. An abominable monster!
Prithee, speak:    Falseness cannot come from thee; for thou look'st    Modest as Justice, and thou seem'st a palace    For the crown'd Truth to dwell in:   I will    believe thee,    And make my senses credit thy relation    To points that seem impossible; for thou look'st    Like one I loved indeed.   What were thy friends?    Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back    Which was when I perceived thee   that thou camest    From good descending?
How have you made division of yourself?    An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin    Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Nay, an thou pass upon me, Ill no more with thee. Hold, theres expenses for thee.
Why, how now, Juliet?
I do assure you, tis against my will.
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer.   Drunk? And speak parrot?   And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse fustian with ones own shadow? O thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil!
I am not merry, but I do beguileThe thing I am by seeming otherwise.Come, how wouldst thou praise me?
You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.
Which shows that beauty hath his power and will,Which can as well inflame as it can kill.
As plain as I see you now.
No, precious creature.    I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,    Than you should such dishonor undergo    While I sit lazy by.
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile? Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Come, knock and enter. And no sooner inBut every man betake him to his legs.
Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!Ill make thee an example.
Be a whore still: they love thee not that use thee;    Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.    Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves    For tubs and baths; bring down rose-cheeked youth    To the tub-fast and the diet.
The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord,    Makes me most forward in this princely presence    To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be.    I say, my lord, they have deservèd death.
Please you, my lord, there are certainladies most desirous of admittance.
Hang thee, young baggage! Disobedient wretch!    I tell thee what: get thee to church o Thursday,    Or never after look me in the face.    Speak not. Reply not. Do not answer me.    My fingers itch.Wife, we scarce thought us blest    That God had lent us but this only child,    But now I see this one is one too much    And that we have a curse in having her.    Out on her, hilding!
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.    Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes    Whom envy hath immured within your walls    Rough cradle for such little pretty ones.    Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow    For tender princes, use my babies well.    So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.
(sings) Alas, why is she so?
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
His princess, say you, with him?
Ready for his friends.
All things that we ordained festival    Turn from their office to black funeral.    Our instruments to melancholy bells,    Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast.    Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,    Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,    And all things change them to the contrary.
Out.
A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear;    No light, no fire: the unfriendly elements    Forgot thee utterly:   nor have I time    To give thee hallow'd to thy grave, but straight    Must cast thee, scarcely coffin'd, in the ooze;    Where, for a monument upon thy bones,    And e'er-remaining lamps, the belching whale    And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse,    Lying with simple shells.   O Lychorida,    Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink and paper,    My casket and my jewels;   and bid Nicander    Bring me the satin coffer:   lay the babe    Upon the pillow: hie thee, whiles I say    A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.
I am glad on t. 'Tis a worthy governor.
Why Hearts ease?
An if your highness knew my heart, you were.    My lord the emperor, resolve me this:    Was it well done of rash Virginius    To slay his daughter with his own right hand,    Because she was enforced, stain'd, and deflower'd?
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,    For beauty, starved with her severity,    Cuts beauty off from all posterity.    She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,    To merit bliss by making me despair.    She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow    Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
I do beseech you, sir, have patience.Your looks are pale and wild, and do importSome misadventure.
Thou art a fool. If Echo were as fleet,    I would esteem him worth a dozen such.    But sup them well and look unto them all.    Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.
What's here? A scroll; and written round about?    Let's see;     [Reads]     'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,    Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu.'
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; neverSaw I men scour so on their way: I eyed themEven to their ships.
News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come.Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters?Shall I have justice? what says Jupiter?
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrongFor the whole world.
Marry, to
I do not doubt thy faith;But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
[to MIRANDA]  This is strange. Your fathers in some passionThat works him strongly.
The more fool you for laying on my duty.
Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?
Are they not Athenians?
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king    Should so with civil and uncivil arms    Be rush'd upon!   Thy thrice noble cousin    Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;    And by the honourable tomb he swears,    That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,    And by the royalties of both your bloods,    Currents that spring from one most gracious head,    And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,    And by the worth and honour of himself,    Comprising all that may be sworn or said,    His coming hither hath no further scope    Than for his lineal royalties and to beg    Enfranchisement immediate on his knees:    Which on thy royal party granted once,    His glittering arms he will commend to rust,    His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart    To faithful service of your majesty.    This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;    And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.
I'll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while:Pray, walk softly, do not heat your blood:What! I must have a care of you.
Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told thee often, and I re-tell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is hearted. Thine hath no less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him.   If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, mea sport. There are many events in the womb of time which will be delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more of this tomorrow. Adieu.
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now thesky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrusta bodkin's point.
This fellows of exceeding honesty    And knows all quantities, with a learnèd spirit,    Of human dealings.   If I do prove her haggard,    Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,    Id whistle her off and let her down the wind    To prey at fortune.   Haply, for I am black    And have not those soft parts of conversation    That chamberers have, or for I am declined    Into the vale of yearsyet thats not much    Shes gone, I am abused, and my relief    Must be to loathe her. Oh, curse of marriage    That we can call these delicate creatures ours    And not their appetites!   I had rather be a toad    And live upon the vapor of a dungeon    Than keep a corner in the thing I love    For others' uses.   Yet tis the plague to great ones,    Prerogatived are they less than the base.    'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death.    Even then this forkèd plague is fated to us    When we do quicken. Look where she comes.
I would not be a stander-by to hear    My sovereign mistress clouded so, without    My present vengeance taken:   'shrew my heart,    You never spoke what did become you less    Than this; which to reiterate were sin    As deep as that, though true.
Sir, sir, the firsts for me; let her go by.
O my good lord, the world is but a word:Were it all yours to give it in a breath,How quickly were it gone!
And what to?
But are you flesh and blood?    Have you a working pulse? and are no fairy?    Motion! Well; speak on. Where were you born?    And wherefore call'd Marina?
Lord Timon's mad.
I warrant something from Venice. 'Tis Lodovico, this, comes from the duke. See, your wifes with him.
Rarest sounds! Do ye not hear?
What says our general?
Why, what need we    Commune with you of this, but rather follow    Our forceful instigation?   Our prerogative    Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness    Imparts this;   which if you, or stupefied    Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not    Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves    We need no more of your advice:   the matter,    The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all    Properly ours.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,    And every day I cannot come to woo.    You knew my father well, and in him me,    Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,    Which I have bettered rather than decreased.    Then tell me, if I get your daughters love,    What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
Why then, the mustard without the beef.
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatched. How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my handsOf this most grievous murder.
She embraces him.
Antonio, O my dear Antonio!How have the hours racked and tortured meSince I have lost thee!
O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day!    Most lamentable day, most woeful day    That ever, ever, I did yet behold!    O day, O day, O day, O hateful day!    Never was seen so black a day as this.    O woeful day, O woeful day!
A knight of Sparta, my renowned father;    And the device he bears upon his shield    Is a black Ethiope reaching at the sun    The word, 'Lux tua vita mihi.'
From him I come    With message unto princely Pericles;    But since my landing I have understood    Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels,    My message must return from whence it came.
Then I lie not.
On what occasion God He knows, not I,    The Queen your mother and your brother York    Have taken sanctuary.   The tender prince    Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,    But by his mother was perforce withheld.
Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid    That paragons description and wild fame,    One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,    And in th' essential vesture of creation    Does tire the ingener.
Oh, monstrous act!
Having been three months married to her, sitting in my state
The noble duke hath been too much abused.
What, was she ravish'd? tell who did the deed.
Your reason, mighty lord?
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
If I do so, it will be of more priceBeing spoke behind your back than to your face.
Face not me. Thou hast braved many men; brave not me. Iwill neither be faced nor braved. I say unto thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown, but I did not bid him cut it to pieces.  Ergo,  thou liest.
With adorations, fertile tears, With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Go then and muster men, but leave behindYour son George Stanley. Look your heart be firm. Or else his heads assurance is but frail.
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet. The meat was well, if you were so contented.
Upon record, my gracious lord.
I would I were thy bird.
O, that's as much as you would be deniedOf your fair courtesy.
Is she not passing fair?
Know, then, it is your fault that you resign    The supreme seat, the throne majestical,    The sceptered office of your ancestors,    Your state of fortune, and your due of birth,    The lineal glory of your royal house,    To the corruption of a blemished stock,    Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,    Which here we waken to our countrys good,    The noble isle doth want her proper limbs    Her face defaced with scars of infamy,    Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,    And almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf    Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion;    Which to recure, we heartily solicit    Your gracious self to take on you the charge    And kingly government of this your land,    Not as Protector, steward, substitute,    Or lowly factor for anothers gain,    But as successively, from blood to blood,    Your right of birth, your empery, your own.    For this, consorted with the citizens,    Your very worshipful and loving friends,    And by their vehement instigation,    In this just suit come I to move your Grace.
Why should you fear? is not your city strong?
Be not afeard. The isle is full of noises,    Sounds, and sweet airs that give delight and hurt not.    Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments    Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices    That, if I then had waked after long sleep,    Will make me sleep again.   And then, in dreaming,    The clouds methought would open and show riches    Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked    I cried to dream again.
We follow thee.Juliet, the county stays.
Or o' mine either?
What, master, read you? First resolve me that.
Now fair befall you! He deserved his death,    And your good Graces both have well proceeded    To warn false traitors from the like attempts.  I never looked for better at his handsAfter he once fell in with Mrs Shore.
What, talking with a priest, Lord Chamberlain?Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest; Your Honor hath no shriving work in hand.
Ay, ay. I care not for good life.
Doth your lordship call?
Come on, come on. Where is your boar-spear, man? Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,Nor shall not, whilst tis in my custody.
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all    That of his bounties taste! The five best senses    Acknowledge thee their patron; and come freely    To gratulate thy plenteous bosom:   th' ear,    Taste, touch and smell, pleased from thy tale rise;    They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
I'll do't, my lord.
Come, come, Lavinia; look, thy foes are bound.    Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me;    But let them hear what fearful words I utter.    O villains, Chiron and Demetrius!    Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud,    This goodly summer with your winter mix'd.    You kill'd her husband, and for that vile fault    Two of her brothers were condemn'd to death,    My hand cut off and made a merry jest;    Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear    Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity,    Inhuman traitors, you constrain'd and forced.    What would you say, if I should let you speak?    Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.    Hark, wretches! how I mean to martyr you.    This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,    Whilst that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold    The basin that receives your guilty blood.    You know your mother means to feast with me,    And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad:    Hark, villains! I will grind your bones to dust    And with your blood and it I'll make a paste,    And of the paste a coffin I will rear    And make two pasties of your shameful heads,    And bid that strumpet, your unhallow'd dam,    Like to the earth swallow her own increase.    This is the feast that I have bid her to,    And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;    For worse than Philomel you used my daughter,    And worse than Progne I will be revenged:    And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come,
Sir, the year growing ancient,    Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth    Of trembling winter,   the fairest    flowers o' the season    Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,    Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind    Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not    To get slips of them.
Zounds!
In faith, I will.Let me peruse this face.    Mercutios kinsman, noble County Paris.    What said my man, when my betossèd soul    Did not attend him as we rode? I think    He told me Paris should have married Juliet.    Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?    Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,    To think it was so?   O, give me thy hand,    One writ with me in sour misfortunes book.    Ill bury thee in a triumphant grave.    [ROMEO opens the tomb to reveal JULIET inside]    A grave? Oh, no. A lantern, slaughtered youth,    For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes    This vault a feasting presence full of light.    Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.    [Lays PARIS in the tomb]    How oft when men are at the point of death    Have they been merry, which their keepers call    A lightning before death! Oh, how may I    Call this a lightning?O my love, my wife!    Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,    Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.    Thou art not conquered.   Beautys ensign yet    Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,    And deaths pale flag is not advancèd there.    Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?    O, what more favor can I do to thee,    Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain    To sunder his that was thine enemy?    Forgive me, cousin.   Ah, dear Juliet,    Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe    That unsubstantial death is amorous,    And that the lean abhorrèd monster keeps    Thee here in dark to be his paramour?    For fear of that, I still will stay with thee,    And never from this palace of dim night    Depart again. Here, here will I remain    With worms that are thy chamber maids.   Oh, here    Will I set up my everlasting rest,    And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars    From this world-wearied flesh.   Eyes, look your last.    Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O you    The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss    A dateless bargain to engrossing death.    [Kisses JULIET, takes out the poison]    Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide.    Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on    The dashing rocks thy seasick, weary bark.    Heres to my love!   [Drinks the poison]   O true apothecary,    Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two,But then up farther, and as far as Rome,And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
An you part so, mistress, I would I might never draw sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?
Thanks, gentle uncle.   Come, lords, away.    To fight with Glendower and his complices:    Awhile to work, and after holiday.
Farewell, farewell. One kiss, and Ill descend.
What would she find? Lavinia, shall I read?    This is the tragic tale of Philomel,    And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape:    And rape, I fear, was root of thine annoy.
See how belief may suffer by foul show!    This borrow'd passion stands for true old woe;    And Pericles, in sorrow all devour'd,    With sighs shot through, and biggest tears o'ershower'd,    Leaves Tarsus and again embarks.    He swears    Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs:    He puts on sackcloth, and to sea.   He bears    A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears,    And yet he rides it out.   Now please you wit.    The epitaph is for Marina writ By wicked Dionyza.     [Reads the inscription on MARINA's monument]      'The fairest, sweet'st, and best lies here,    Who wither'd in her spring of year.    She was of Tyrus the king's daughter,    On whom foul death hath made this slaughter;    Marina was she call'd; and at her birth,    Thetis, being proud, swallow'd some part o' the earth:    Therefore the earth, fearing to be o'erflow'd,    Hath Thetis' birth-child on the heavens bestow'd:    Wherefore she does, and swears she'll never stint,    Make raging battery upon shores of flint.'    No visor does become black villany    So well as soft and tender flattery.    Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead,    And bear his courses to be ordered    By Lady Fortune;   while our scene must play    His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-dayIn her unholy service.    Patience, then,    And think you now are all in Mytilene.
That by degrees we mean to look into    And watch our vantage in this business.    Well overreach the graybeard, Gremio,    The narrow-prying father, Minola,    The quaint musician, amorous Litio,    All for my masters sake, Lucentio.
No marrying mong his subjects?
Fie, no, do not believe it; he cannot want for money.
As we do turn our backs    From our companion thrown into his grave,    So his familiars to his buried fortunes    Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,    Like empty purses pick'd;   and his poor self,    A dedicated beggar to the air,    With his disease of all-shunn'd poverty,    Walks, like contempt, alone. More of our fellows.
I will have none on t. We shall lose our time,And all be turned to barnacles or to apesWith foreheads villainous low.
It is against my heart.
Send for money, knight. If thou hast her not i' the end, call me Cut.
If Timon stay at home. You three serve three usurers?
Yes, sir, I have indeed.
You cram these words into mine ears against    The stomach of my sense. Would I had never    Married my daughter there!   For, coming thence,    My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,    Who is so far from Italy removed    I ne'er again shall see her.   O thou mine heir    Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish    Hath made his meal on thee?
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.    Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?    What is become of Bushy? where is Green?    That they have let the dangerous enemy    Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?    If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:    I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.
By my head, here comes the Capulets.
An if I do not, may my hands rot offAnd never brandish more revengeful steelOver the glittering helmet of my foe!
Here lies my gown.
Oh, I have read it. It is heresy. Have you no more to say?
'Tis true, most worthy signior.The Dukes in council and your noble self,I am sure, is sent for.
O you gods!    Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?    Full of decay and failing? O monument    And wonder of good deeds evilly bestow'd!    What an alteration of honour    Has desperate want made!    What viler thing upon the earth than friends    Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!    How rarely does it meet with this time's guise,    When man was wish'd to love his enemies!    Grant I may ever love, and rather woo    Those that would mischief me than those that do!    Has caught me in his eye: I will present    My honest grief unto him; and, as my lord,    Still serve him with my life. My dearest master!
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not. He would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
If to have done the thing you gave in chargeBeget your happiness, be happy then,For it is done.
Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy    To stand upon my kingdom once again.    Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,    Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs:    As a long-parted mother with her child    Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,    So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,    And do thee favours with my royal hands.    Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,    Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;    But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,    And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,    Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet    Which with usurping steps do trample thee:    Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;    And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,    Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder    Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch    Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.    Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:    This earth shall have a feeling and these stones    Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king    Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
I think thou dost.    And for I know thou 'rt full of love and honesty    And weighst thy words before thou givst them breath,    Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more.    For such things in a false disloyal knave    Are tricks of custom, but in a man thats just    They are close dilations, working from the heart,    That passion cannot rule.
Lechery! I defy lechery. Theres one at the gate.
I shall not need transport my words by you;Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne    Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.    By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty    With those gross taunts that oft I have endured.    I had rather be a country servant-maid    Than a great queen with this condition,    To be so baited, scorned, and stormèd at.
Here; I will mend thy feast.
Hark you, my friend; you said you could not beg.
I should have been a sore one then.
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.
[to RICHARD]   Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fearLet fall thy lance. Despair, and die!
Why, are all your beggars whipped, then?
My dear Othello!
Show me a villain that hath done a rape,And I am sent to be revenged on him.
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel,    And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?    O, but remember this another day,    When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,    And say poor Margaret was a prophetess.    Live each of you the subjects to his hate,    And he to yours, and all of you to Gods.
Where left we last?
Richard!
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
I humbly take my leave.
I thought all for the best.
Ah, for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
'Tis death for anyone in Mantua    To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?    Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke,    For private quarrel twixt your duke and him,    Hath published and proclaimed it openly.    'Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come,    You might have heard it else proclaimed about.
Hang him, jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
Your grace mistakes; only to be briefLeft I his title out.
I shall be reconciled to him again.
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate    With thy most operant poison! What is here?    Gold? yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, gods,    I am no idle votarist:   roots, you clear heavens!    Thus much of this will make black white, foul fair,    Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.    Ha, you gods! why this?   what this, you gods? Why, this    Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,    Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads:    This yellow slave    Will knit and break religions, bless the accursed,    Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves    And give them title, knee and approbation    With senators on the bench:   this is it    That makes the wappen'd widow wed again;    She, whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores    Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices    To the April day again.   Come, damned earth,    Thou common whore of mankind, that put'st odds    Among the route of nations, I will make thee    Do thy right nature.
Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,    To chide my fortune and torment myself?    Ill join with black despair against my soul    And to myself become an enemy.
[as LUCENTIO]  Curster than she? Why, tis impossible.
So they are.    My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.    My fathers loss, the weakness which I feel,    The wrack of all my friends, nor this mans threats,    To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,    Might I but through my prison once a day    Behold this maid.   All corners else o' th' earth    Let liberty make use of. Space enough    Have I in such a prison.
Unclasp, unclasp:    Thanks, gentlemen, to all; all have done well.    [  To PERICLES]     But you the best.   Pages and lights, to conduct    These knights unto their several lodgings!    Yours, sir,    We have given order to be next our own.
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.    Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me.    Because that I am little, like an ape,    He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Oh, that record is lively in my soul! He finished indeed his mortal actThat day that made my sister thirteen years.
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy,   as a squash is before tis a peascod, or a codling when tis almost an apple.   'Tis with him in standing water, between boy and man.   He is very well-favored, andhe speaks very shrewishly.   One would think his mothersmilk were scarce out of him.
I could render one.
Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness.   Thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow ofthy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well.
Always a villain's office or a fool's.Dost please thyself in't?
Come hither, you rogue! What, have you forgot me?
The best news is that we have safely found    Our king and company. The next, our ship    Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split    Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when    We first put out to sea.
Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men thatwere cast away before us even now.
[picking up the letter]  By my life, this is my ladys hand these be her very Cs, her Us and her Ts and thusmakes she her great Ps.  It is, in contempt of question, her hand.
Never, my lord.
O, but, sir,    Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis    Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:    One of these two must be necessities,    Which then will speak, that you must    change this purpose,    Or I my life.
Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty aproportion to live quietly, and so give over.
Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond,And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen,Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
Did ever Dian so become a grove    As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?    Oh, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate,    And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful.
[as LUCENTIO]  O despiteful love! Unconstant womankind! I tell thee, Litio, this is wonderful!
Good.
Excellent! Your lordship's a goodly villain. The    devil knew not what he did when he made man    politic; he crossed himself by 't: and I cannot    think but, in the end, the villainies of man will    set him clear.   How fairly this lord strives to    appear foul! takes virtuous copies to be wicked,    like those that under hot ardent zeal would set    whole realms on fire: Of such a nature is his    politic love.    This was my lord's best hope; now all are fled,    Save only the gods: now his friends are dead,    Doors, that were ne'er acquainted with their wards    Many a bounteous year must be employ'd    Now to guard sure their master.    And this is all a liberal course allows;    Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.
(as    LUCENTIO    )    Then go with me to make the matter good.    This, by the way, I let you understand:    My father is here looked for every day    To pass assurance of a dower in marriage    'Twixt me and one Baptistas daughter here.    In all these circumstances Ill instruct you.    Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
To supper; to our house.
These banish'd men that I have kept withal    Are men endued with worthy qualities:    Forgive them what they have committed here    And let them be recall'd from their exile:    They are reformed, civil, full of good    And fit for great employment, worthy lord.
He'll spare none.
What means that trump?
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,But to the next highway, and there I left him.
What sense had I in her stol'n hours of lust?    I saw t not, thought it not, it harmed not me.    I slept the next night well, fed well, was free and merry.    I found not Cassios kisses on her lips.    He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n,    Let him not knowt, and hes not robbed at all.
What noise is here?
The gods preserve ye!
Not well.
Why, what did I? I did nothing. Ill go farther off.
So would not I. My love doth so approve him    That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns    Prithee, unpin mehave grace and favor.
That he was never trainèd up in arms.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.
To do that office of thine own good willWhich tired majesty did make thee offer,The resignation of thy state and crownTo Henry Bolingbroke.
Why, sweet Othello
So said, so done, is well.Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
Sir, I will tell you;Since I am charged in honour and by himThat I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,Which must be even as swiftly follow'd asI mean to utter it, or both yourself and meCry lost, and so good night!
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,Are you so fond of your young prince as weDo seem to be of ours?
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in t.
Ah, Desdemona, away, away, away!
So thou apprehendest it: take it for thy labour.
Help, help, help! Heres a madman will murder me.
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say youhave none.
O comfortable Friar! Where is my lord?    I do remember well where I should be,    And there I am.   Where is my Romeo?
Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood.I cannot twixt the heaven and the mainDescry a sail.
You look wearily.
What is your crest? A coxcomb?
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes    God save the mark!here on his manly breast.    A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse.    Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,    All in gore blood. I swoonèd at the sight.
She may, Lord Rivers. Why, who knows not so?    She may do more, sir, than denying that.    She may help you to many fair preferments    And then deny her aiding hand therein,    And lay those honors on your high desert.    What may she not? She may, ay, marry, may she
Much!
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near    Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.    Come, I have learned that fearful commenting    Is leaden servitor to dull delay;    Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary;    Then fiery expedition be my wing,    Joves Mercury, and herald for a king.    Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield.    We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
Ay, sir; and he deserves so to be called for hispeaceable reign and good government.
She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?
Amen.
My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world    Since lowly feigning was calld compliment.    Youre servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
[aside]    The Duke of Milan    And his more braver daughter could control thee    If now twere fit to do t!   At the first sight    They have changed eyes.     Delicate Ariel,    Ill set thee free for this.     [to FERDINAND]     A word, good sir.    I fear you have done yourself some wrong. A word.
Look round about the wicked streets of Rome;    And when thou find'st a man that's like thyself.    Good Murder, stab him; he's a murderer.    Go thou with him; and when it is thy hap    To find another that is like to thee,    Good Rapine, stab him; he's a ravisher.    Go thou with them; and in the emperor's court    There is a queen, attended by a Moor;    Well mayst thou know her by thy own proportion,    for up and down she doth resemble thee:    I pray thee, do on them some violent death;    They have been violent to me and mine.
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,A villain that is hither come in spiteTo scorn at our solemnity this night.
Knock me down with 'em: cleave me to the girdle.
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my    father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and    called me brother;   and then the two kings called my    father brother; and then the prince my brother and    the princess my sister called my father father;   and    so we wept,   and there was the first gentleman-like    tears that ever we shed.
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
Thyself is self-misused.
'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,All of companionship.
Mine, fifty talents.
Touch me not so near.    I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth    Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio.    Yet I persuade myself to speak the truth    Shall nothing wrong him. This it is, general:    Montano and myself being in speech,    There comes a fellow crying out for help    And Cassio following him with determined sword    To execute upon him.   Sir, this gentleman    Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause,    Myself the crying fellow did pursue,    Lest by his clamoras it so fell out    The town might fall in fright.   He, swift of foot,    Outran my purpose, and I returned then rather    For that I heard the clink and fall of swords    And Cassio high in oath,   which till tonight    I ne'er might say before. When I came back    For this was brief I found them close together    At blow and thrust,   even as again they were    When you yourself did part them.    More of this matter cannot I report.    But men are men, the best sometimes forget.    Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,    As men in rage strike those that wish them best,    Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received    From him that fled some strange indignity    Which patience could not pass.
Ill deliver all,    And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales,    And sail so expeditious that shall catch    Your royal fleet far off.    [aside to ARIEL]    My Ariel, chick,    That is thy charge. Then to the elements    Be free, and fare thou well!   Please you, draw near.
Then never man was man true.
That defense thou hast, betake thee to t   . Of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not, but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends thee at the orchard end.   Dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skillful and deadly.
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?
[Aside]  But love will not be spurr'd to whatit loathes.
Ay, is t, I warrant him. Do but read.
Katherine the curst!A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
What, not a whore?
God bless your Grace! We see it and will say it.
Good honest men! Thou draw'st a counterfeitBest in all Athens: thou'rt, indeed, the best;Thou counterfeit'st most lively.
Come, bustle, bustle. Caparison my horse.    Call up Lord Stanley; bid him bring his power.    I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,    And thus my battle shall be orderèd:    My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,    Consisting equally of horse and foot;    Our archers shall be placèd in the midst.    John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,    Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.    They thus directed, we will follow    In the main battle, whose puissance on either side    Shall be well wingèd with our chiefest horse.    This, and Saint George to bootWhat thinkst thou, Norfolk?
Would I mightBut ever see that man!
If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.
'Tis well I am found by you.I will but spend a word here in the houseAnd go with you.
Most worthy madam,    Your honour and your goodness is so evident    That your free undertaking cannot miss    A thriving issue:   there is no lady living    So meet for this great errand.   Please your ladyship    To visit the next room, I'll presently    Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;    Who but to-day hammer'd of this design,    But durst not tempt a minister of honour,    Lest she should be denied.
Evermore weeping for your cousins death?    What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?    An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.    Therefore, have done. Some grief shows much of love,    But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?
Your actions are my dreams;    You had a bastard by Polixenes,    And I but dream'd it.   As you were past all shame,    Those of your fact are soso past all truth:    Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as    Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,    No father owning it,   which is, indeed,    More criminal in thee than it,so thou    Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage    Look for no less than death.
Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.
Set 't down, let's look upon't.
Love me or love me not, I like the cap, And it I will have, or I will have none.
Proceed.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
[To the Fool]  Why, how now, captain! what do youin this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus?
Catesby, fly to the duke.
How! Let me see:Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
[as LUCENTIO]  Thou'rt a tall fellow. Hold thee that to drink.  Gives money
(aside)    I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense,    And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio    Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,    Every way makes my gain.   Live Roderigo,    He calls me to a restitution large    Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him    As gifts to Desdemona.    It must not be. If Cassio do remain    He hath a daily beauty in his life    That makes me ugly.   And besides, the Moor    May unfold me to himthere stand I in much peril.    No, he must die. But so, I hear him coming.
Monster, lay to your fingers. Help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is, or Ill turn you out of mykingdom. Go to, carry this.
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
Pardon me, madam: little joy have I    To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.    King Richard, he is in the mighty hold    Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd:    In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,    And some few vanities that make him light;    But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,    Besides himself, are all the English peers,    And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.    Post you to London, and you will find it so;    I speak no more than every one doth know.
Fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: I am as well in my wits, Fool, as thou art.
Ay, but not frighted me. Therefore Ill sleep again.
You are one of thoseWould have him wed again.
Whats that?
He wonders to what end you have assembled    Such troops of citizens to come to him,    His grace not being warned thereof before.    He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
Thou saw'st them, when I had prosperity.
Or docks, or mallows.
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear    it in the behalf of his friend:   and I'll swear to    the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and    that thou wilt not be drunk;   but I know thou art no    tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be    drunk:   but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst    be a tall fellow of thy hands.
What, is he angry?
It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause;    For I am loath to break our country's laws.    Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are:    Things past redress are now with me past care.
Taste your legs, sir. Put them to motion.
They must take it in sense that feel it.
Did you see my cap?
Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
Most rare.
Thou hast hit it. Come, sit on me.
(  aside  ) What, what?
Against them both my true joints bended be.Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!
Take heed you dally not before your king,    Lest He that is the supreme King of kings    Confound your hidden falsehood, and award    Either of you to be the others end.
Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not    That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,    Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,    Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen    In murders and in outrage, boldly here;    But when from under this terrestrial ball    He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines    And darts his light through every guilty hole,    Then murders, treasons and detested sins,    The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,    Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?    So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,    Who all this while hath revell'd in the night    Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,    Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,    His treasons will sit blushing in his face,    Not able to endure the sight of day,    But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.    Not all the water in the rough rude sea    Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;    The breath of worldly men cannot depose    The deputy elected by the Lord:    For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd    To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,    God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay    A glorious angel:   then, if angels fight,    Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
My Lord of Norfolk
Prithee come, will you?
The voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.
(sings) O' the twelfth day of December
Welcome, my son: who are the violets nowThat strew the green lap of the new come spring?
Marry, heaven forbid! Light, gentlemen, Ill bind it with my shirt.
Windy attorneys to their clients' woes,    Airy succeeders of intestate joys,    Poor breathing orators of miseries,    Let them have scope, though what they will impart    Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.
The nameWas given me by one that had some power,My father, and a king.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
No.
Prithee, peace.
Sir king, all hail! the gods preserve you!Hail, royal sir!
Sirrah, go you to Bartholmew, my page,    And see him dressed in all suits like a lady.    That done, conduct him to the drunkards chamber    And call him madam, do him obeisance.    Tell him from me, as he will win my love,    He bear himself with honorable action,    Such as he hath observed in noble ladies    Unto their lords, by them accomplishèd.    Such duty to the drunkard let him do    With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,    And say,   What is t your Honor will command,    Wherein your lady and your humble wife    May show her duty and make known her love?    And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,    And with declining head into his bosom,    Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed    To see her noble lord restored to health,    Who for this seven years hath esteemed him    No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.    And if the boy have not a womans gift    To rain a shower of commanded tears,    An onion will do well for such a shift,    Which in a napkin being close conveyed    Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.   See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst:Anon Ill give thee more instructions.
M.O.A.I. doth sway my life. Nay, but first, let me see, let me see, let me see.
Is t possible?
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.    We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.    Is it een so? Why, then, I thank you all.    I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.    More torches here!Come on then, lets to bed.    Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.    Ill to my rest.
I could not send ithere it is again  [Gives FRIAR LAWRENCE a letter]   Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,So fearful were they of infection.
Alas, poor caitiff!
[to RICHARD]     Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower.    Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard,    And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death.    Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die.     [to RICHMOND]     Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy.    Good angels guard thee from the boars annoy.    Live, and beget a happy race of kings.    Edwards unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words.    For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,    Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door;    And rail upon the hostess of the house,    And say you would present her at the leet,    Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts.    Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceivingfather of a deceitful son.
We do not know.
Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch, To try if thou be current gold indeed.Young Edward lives; think now what I would speak.
Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.    My care is loss of care, by old care done;    Your care is gain of care, by new care won:    The cares I give I have, though given away;    They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
I would he knew that I had saved his brother. Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say,For I repent me that the duke is slain.
Why, she hath a face of her own.
Twenty crowns?Ill venture so much of my hawk or hound, But twenty times so much upon my wife.
I cannot be so answerd.
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!The prince your son, with mere conceit and fearOf the queen's speed, is gone.
Being once perfected how to grant suits,    How to deny them, who t' advance and who    To trash for overtopping, new created    The creatures that were mine, I say   or changed 'em,    Or else new formed 'emhaving both the key    Of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state    To what tune pleased his ear,   that now he was    The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,    And sucked my verdure out on t. Thou attendst not.
Here comes the duke.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes.Examine other beauties.
See how they kiss and court!   Signior Lucentio,    Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow    Never to woo her more,   but do forswear her    As one unworthy all the former favors    That I have fondly flattered her withal.
Heavens thank you for t! And now, I pray you, sir    For still tis beating in my mindyour reason    For raising this sea storm?
To please the king I did; to please myself    I cannot do it;   yet I know no cause    Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,    Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest    As my sweet Richard   : yet again, methinks,    Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,    Is coming towards me, and my inward soul    With nothing trembles   : at some thing it grieves,    More than with parting from my lord the king.
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.
My mistress is my mistress; this myself,    The vigour and the picture of my youth:    This before all the world do I prefer;    This maugre all the world will I keep safe,    Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.
Now I arise.     [stands and puts on his mantle]     Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.    Here in this island we arrived, and here    Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit    Than other princesses can that have more time    For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.
O, if I thought that, Id beat him like a dog!
Do, good old grandsire, and withal make knownWhich way thou travellest. If along with us,We shall be joyful of thy company.
Oh, help, ho! Light! A surgeon!
How hast thou offended? Where is Lucentio?
If he will touch the estimate: but, for that
When the devout religion of mine eye    Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires,    And these, who, often drowned, could never die,    Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!    One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun    Neer saw her match since first the world begun.
And you shall pay well for 'em.  [Follows singing]    Will you buy any tape,    Or lace for your cape,    My dainty duck, my dear-a?    Any silk, any thread,    Any toys for your head,    Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a?    Come to the pedlar;    Money's a medler.    That doth utter all men's ware-a.
Yet come again, for thou perhaps mayst move That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
Ay, theres the point. As, to be bold with you,    Not to affect many proposèd matches    Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,    Whereto we see in all things nature tends    Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,    Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural.    Butpardon me   I do not in position    Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear    Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,    May fall to match you with her country forms,    And happily repent.
Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter; I never drank with himin all my life.
Well, my good lord, Ill do t.
(sings) Shall I bid him go, and spare not?
No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy-houses:shall's go hear the vestals sing?
'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. And this may help to thicken other proofsThat do demonstrate thinly.
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about withtroll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of theprince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of hisvirtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of thecourt.
[t    o  MARIA   ]  Prithee, hold thy peace. This is not the way. Do you not see you move him? Let me alone with him.
Lives my sweet son?
Then will I lay the serving creatures dagger on your pate. I will carry no crotchets. Ill re you, Ill fa you. Do you note me?
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Good ancient, you are welcome.Welcome, mistress.     (kisses EMILIA)     Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,    That I extend my manners. 'Tis my breeding    That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
Live loathed and long,    Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,    Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,    You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, time's flies,    Cap and knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks!    Of man and beast the infinite malady    Crust you quite o'er! What, dost thou go?    Soft! take thy physic firstthou tooand thou;    Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.
Who is the first that doth prefer himself?
[Aside]  Lord Lucius and Lucullus? hum!
Let us take the law of our sides. Let them begin.
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.     [to SECOND MURDERER]     My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks.    O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,    Come thou on my side and entreat for me.    A begging prince what beggar pities not?
Turio, give back, or else embrace thy death;    Come not within the measure of my wrath;    Do not name Silvia thine; if once again,    Verona shall not hold thee.   Here she stands;    Take but possession of her with a touch:    I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
Pardon, sweet father.
Methinks a father    Is at the nuptial of his son a guest    That best becomes the table.   Pray you once more,    Is not your father grown incapable    Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid    With age and altering rheums?   can he speak? hear?    Know man from man? dispute his own estate?    Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing    But what he did being childish?
Ay, that Petruchio came.
[From within]  Let me come in, and you shall know my errand. I come from Lady Juliet.
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?    Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?    Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,    Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,    Or seven fair branches springing from one root:    Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,    Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;    But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,    One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,    One flourishing branch of his most royal root,    Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt,    Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,    By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.    Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,    That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee    Made him a man   ; and though thou livest and breathest,    Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent    In some large measure to thy father's death,    In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,    Who was the model of thy father's life.    Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair:    In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd,    Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,    Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:    That which in mean men we intitle patience    Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.    What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,    The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.
(  aside  ) Excellent wench, say I.
What, my gracious lord?
But, my good lord, your Graces' words shall serve    As well as I had seen and heard him speak;    And do not doubt, right noble princes both,    But Ill acquaint our duteous citizens    With all your just proceedings in this case.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,    With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touch'd;    For death-like dragons here affright thee hard:    Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view    Her countless glory, which desert must gain;    And which, without desert, because thine eye    Presumes to reach, all thy whole heap must die.    Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself,    Drawn by report, adventurous by desire,    Tell thee, with speechless tongues and semblance pale,    That without covering, save yon field of stars,    Here they stand martyrs, slain in Cupid's wars;    And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist    For going on death's net, whom none resist.
Nay, but my letters, by this means being thereSo soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
Is she not a fair creature?
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine.    I have not that alacrity of spirit    Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have.    Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
Great God of heaven, say amen to all!But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
Will you go hunt, my lord?
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike    The inhospitable Cleon; but I am    For other service first:   toward Ephesus    Turn our blown sails; eftsoons I'll tell thee why.      [To LYSIMACHUS]     Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore,    And give you gold for such provision    As our intents will need?
Thou dost snore distinctly.Theres meaning in thy snores.
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thyrequests to thy friend.
Oh, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.
Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of death.  [he striketh him]  There, take thou that till thou bring better news.
My lord, the army of great Buckingham
Oh, where is Romeo? Saw you him today?Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Do you hear, sir?
Thou dost speak masterly.    My life upon t, young though thou art, thine eye    Hath stayd upon some favor that it loves.    Hath it not, boy?
How! Shes busy, and she cannot come!Is that an answer?
Bear witness, Heaven, I have my wish for ever.
Upon the stroke of four.
Fetch me the handkerchiefmy mind misgives.
Now, Catesby, what says his grace?
To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall we make the welkin dance indeed?   Shall we rouse the night owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? Shall we do that?
Nor I.
[Aside]  'Tis true; such pearls as put outladies' eyes;For I had rather wink than look on them.
Go to. I say you shall.
What then?
Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to    the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all    places alike.   Make not a city feast of it, to let    the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place:    sit, sit. The gods require our thanks.    You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with    thankfulness. For your own gifts, make yourselves    praised: but reserve still to give, lest your    deities be despised.   Lend to each man enough, that    one need not lend to another; for, were your    godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the    gods.   Make the meat be beloved more than the man    that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without    a score of villains: if there sit twelve women at    the table, let a dozen of them beas they are.   The    rest of your fees, O godsthe senators of Athens,    together with the common lag of peoplewhat is    amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for    destruction.   For these my present friends, as they    are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to    nothing are they welcome.    Uncover, dogs, and lap.
The ground indeed is tawny.
I know his lordship is but merry with me;He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.
For what reason, I beseech you?
Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well:commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my veryexquisite friend.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? Speak, nephew. Were you by when it began?
Happy indeed, as we have spent the day.    Brother, we have done deeds of charity,    Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,    Between these swelling, wrong-incensèd peers.
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
Well, call forth, call forth.
Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lord's a    bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise; and thou    knowest well enough, although thou comest to me,    that this is no time to lend money, especially upon    bare friendship, without security.   Here's three    solidares for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say    thou sawest me not. Fare thee well.
He, sir.
Look what is done cannot be now amended.    Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,    Which after-hours give leisure to repent.    If I did take the kingdom from your sons,    To make amends Ill give it to your daughter.    If I have killed the issue of your womb,    To quicken your increase I will beget    Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter.    A grandams name is little less in love    Than is the doting title of a mother.    They are as children but one step below,    Even of your metal, of your very blood,    Of all one pain, save for a night of groans    Endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow.    Your children were vexation to your youth,    But mine shall be a comfort to your age.    The loss you have is but a son being king,    And by that loss your daughter is made queen.    I cannot make you what amends I would;    Therefore accept such kindness as I can.    Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul    Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,    This fair alliance quickly shall call home    To high promotions and great dignity.    The king that calls your beauteous daughter wife    Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother.    Again shall you be mother to a king,    And all the ruins of distressful times    Repaired with double riches of content.    What, we have many goodly days to see!    The liquid drops of tears that you have shed    Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl,    Advantaging their love with interest    Of ten times double gain of happiness.    Go then, my mother; to thy daughter go.    Make bold her bashful years with your experience;    Prepare her ears to hear a wooers tale;    Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame    Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess    With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys;    And when this arm of mine hath chastisèd    The petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham,    Bound with triumphant garlands will I come    And lead thy daughter to a conquerors bed,    To whom I will retail my conquest won,    And she shall be sole victoress, Caesars Caesar.
Open t, and read it.
As surely as I live, my lord.
For aught I know, my lord, they do.
Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me tooThou mayst be damnèd for that wicked deed.O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,    And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man'    That would divorce this terror from my heart;'    Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go:    I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.
Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and the condition of this country stands, I couldheartily wish this had not befallen. But since it is asit is, mend it for your own good.
(to EMILIA)    Some of your function, mistress,    Leave procreants alone and shut the door.    Cough or cry hem if any body come.    Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch!
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as ifI were a baby still. I love you better.
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!    For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,    I will be married to a wealthy widow,    Ere three days pass,   which hath as long loved me    As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.    And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.    Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,    Shall win my love,   and so I take my leave,    In resolution as I swore before.
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come That I should wish for thee to help me curseThat bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!
Bring down the devil; for he must not dieSo sweet a death as hanging presently.
Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby,    His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries    Tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret castle,    And bid my lord, for joy of this good news,    Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
Ill, when you talk of war.
But in your daughters womb I bury them,Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breedSelves of themselves, to your recomforture.
What?
Good my lord, give me thy favor still.    Be patient, for the prize Ill bring thee to    Shall hoodwink this mischance.   Therefore speak softly.    Alls hushed as midnight yet.
Noble lords,    Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;    Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley    Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:    Henry Bolingbroke    On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand    And sends allegiance and true faith of heart    To his most royal person,   hither come    Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,    Provided that my banishment repeal'd    And lands restored again be freely granted:    If not, I'll use the advantage of my power    And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood    Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen:    The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke    It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench    The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,    My stooping duty tenderly shall show.    Go, signify as much, while here we march    Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.    Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,    That from this castle's tatter'd battlements    Our fair appointments may be well perused.    Methinks King Richard and myself should meet    With no less terror than the elements    Of fire and water, when their thundering shock    At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.    Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water:    The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain    My waters; on the earth, and not on him.    March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
Throng'd to!
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:    'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,    The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,    Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;    The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this:    Yet can I not of such tame patience boast    As to be hush'd and nought at all to say:    First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me    From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;    Which else would post until it had return'd    These terms of treason doubled down his throat.    Setting aside his high blood's royalty,    And let him be no kinsman to my liege,    I do defy him, and I spit at him;    Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:    Which to maintain I would allow him odds,    And meet him, were I tied to run afoot    Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,    Or any other ground inhabitable,    Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.    Mean time let this defend my loyalty,    By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
Is it his use?Or did the letters work upon his bloodAnd new-create his fault?
True; for he bears it not about him, 'tis hid.
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.
That I had no angry wit to be a lord.Art not thou a merchant?
To, to, to
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them:    That codding spirit had they from their mother,    As sure a card as ever won the set;    That bloody mind, I think, they learn'd of me,    As true a dog as ever fought at head.    Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.    I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole    Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay:    I wrote the letter that thy father found    And hid the gold within the letter mention'd,    Confederate with the queen and her two sons:    And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,    Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?    I play'd the cheater for thy father's hand,    And, when I had it, drew myself apart    And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter:    I pry'd me through the crevice of a wall    When, for his hand, he had his two sons' heads;    Beheld his tears, and laugh'd so heartily,    That both mine eyes were rainy like to his :    And when I told the empress of this sport,    She swooned almost at my pleasing tale,    And for my tidings gave me twenty kisses.
Is it een so? Then I defy you, stars! Thou knowst my lodging. Get me ink and paper,And hire post horses. I will hence tonight.
O blessèd, blessèd night! I am afeard, Being in night, all this is but a dream,Too flattering sweet to be substantial.
A greater gift? O, thats the sword to it.
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
Will you hoist sail, sir? Here lies your way.
He shall enlarge him.
Ay, Timon.
[aside]  O, peace! Now hes deeply in. Look how imagination blows him.
Do then, but Ill not hear.
Swear his thought over    By each particular star in heaven and    By all their influences, you may as well    Forbid the sea for to obey the moon    As or by oath remove or counsel shake    The fabric of his folly,   whose foundation    Is piled upon his faith and will continue    The standing of his body.
Come with me, fool, come.
As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of    thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of    thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to    have had thee than thus to want thee:   thou, having    made me businesses which none without thee can    sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute    them thyself or take away with thee the very    services thou hast done;   which if I have not enough    considered, as too much I cannot, to be more    thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit    therein the heaping friendships.   Of that fatal    country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very    naming punishes me with the remembrance of that    penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,    my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen    and children are even now to be afresh lamented.    Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my    son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not    being gracious, than they are in losing them when    they have approved their virtues.
[Aside]  And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
Not so, neither, but I am resolved on two points.
(  aside  ) Thats me, I warrant you.
Ha! a drum ? Thou'rt quick,    But yet I'll bury thee: thou'lt go, strong thief,    When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.    Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
Sir Valentine!
Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs.   It did come to his hands, and commands shall be executed. I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
Think you, my lord, this little prating YorkWas not incensèd by his subtle motherTo taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
In God's name and the king's, say who thou art    And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,    Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel:    Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;    As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!
Spirits, which by mine artI have from their confines called to enactMy present fancies.
[as LITIO]  Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Now, masters, draw.
To God, the widow's champion and defence.
Nay, I prithee stay a little. I hope this passionate humor of mine will change. It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.
No, wench! It eats and sleeps and hath such senses    As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest    Was in the wrack.   And, but hes something stained    With grief thats beautys canker, thou mightst call him    A goodly person.   He hath lost his fellows    And strays about to find 'em.
Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'
I am maimed for ever. Help, ho! Murder! Murder!
Set but thy foot    Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope;    So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,    To say thou'lt enter friendly.
Then let thy love be younger than thyself,    Or thy affection cannot hold the bent.  For women are as roses, whose fair flowerBeing once displayed, doth fall that very hour.
I cannot tell if to depart in silence    Or bitterly to speak in your reproof    Best fitteth my degree or your condition.    If not to answer, you might haply think    Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded    To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,    Which fondly you would here impose on me.    If to reprove you for this suit of yours,    So seasoned with your faithful love to me,    Then on the other side I checked my friends.    Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,    And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,    Definitively thus I answer you:    Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert    Unmeritable shuns your high request.    First, if all obstacles were cut away    And that my path were even to the crown    As the ripe revenue and due of birth,    Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,    So mighty and so many my defects,    That I would rather hide me from my greatness,    Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,    Than in my greatness covet to be hid    And in the vapor of my glory smothered.    But, God be thanked, there is no need of me,    And much I need to help you, were there need.    The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,    Which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time,    Will well become the seat of majesty,    And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.    On him I lay what you would lay on me,    The right and fortune of his happy stars,    Which God defend that I should wring from him.
Peace, you were best.
Magni Dominator poli,Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?
What doth she say, my lord of Buckingham?
Are you contented to resign the crown?
I will deny thee nothing! Whereon I do beseech thee, grant me this,To leave me but a little to myself.
He speaks well.
I'll do my best, sir.
[aside]  Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtlessSees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?
Look hes winding up the watch of his wit. By and by itwill strike.
Oh, ho, monster, we know what belongs to a frippery.  [puts on a gown]  O King Stephano!
Well.    Now come, my Ariel!   Bring a corollary,    Rather than want a spirit. Appear and pertly!    No tongue. All eyes! Be silent.
Most true, he does.
Aaron, what shall I say unto the empress?
Alas,    the storm is come again! My best way is to creep underhis gaberdine.   T   here is no other shelter hereabouts. Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows. I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past.    [crawlsunder gaberdine]
Sir, my liege,Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazesThan what you look on now.
See where she comes, apparell'd like the spring,    Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king    Of every virtue gives renown to men!    Her face the book of praises, where is read    Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence    Sorrow were ever razed and testy wrath    Could never be her mild companion.    You gods that made me man, and sway in love,    That have inflamed desire in my breast    To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree,    Or die in the adventure,   be my helps,    As I am son and servant to your will,    To compass such a boundless happiness!
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!How often said, my dignity would lastBut till 'twere known!
I will, my lord. God give your Grace good rest.
Thy thoughts I cleave to. Whats thy pleasure?
Out, hyperbolical fiend! How vexest thou this man! Talkest thou nothing but of ladies?
My heart is great; but it must break with silence,Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.
Poor heart, adieu. I pity thy complaining.
Hark, how they knock!Whos there?Romeo, arise. Thou wilt be taken.Stay awhile.Stand up.
But stay, here come the gardeners:    Let's step into the shadow of these trees.    My wretchedness unto a row of pins,    They'll talk of state; for every one doth so    Against a change   ; woe is forerun with woe.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
It shall be seven ere I go to horse.    Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,    You are still crossing it.   Sirs, let t alone.    I will not go today, and ere I do    It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
That he, our hope, might have retired his power,    And driven into despair an enemy's hope,    Who strongly hath set footing in this land:    The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,    And with uplifted arms is safe arrived    At Ravenspurgh.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
(as  LUCENTIO]   That only came well in.   [To BAPTISTA]   Sir, list to me:    I am my fathers heir and only son.    If I may have your daughter to my wife,    Ill leave her houses three or four as good,    Within rich Pisa walls, as any one    Old Signior Gremio has in Padua,    Besides two thousand ducats by the year    Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.    What, have I pinched you, Signior Gremio?
Marry, God defend his grace should say us nay!
[Aside]   Well, I perceive    I shall not be hang'd now, although I would;    But since he's gone, the king's seas must please:    He 'scaped the land, to perish at the sea.    I'll present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre!
Marry. God forbid!    Worst in this royal presence may I speak,    Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.    Would God that any in this noble presence    Were enough noble to be upright judge    Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would    Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.    What subject can give sentence on his king?    And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?    Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,    Although apparent guilt be seen in them;    And shall the figure of God's majesty,    His captain, steward, deputy-elect,    Anointed, crowned, planted many years,    Be judged by subject and inferior breath,    And he himself not present?   O, forfend it, God,    That in a Christian climate souls refined    Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!    I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,    Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king:    My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,    Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king:    And if you crown him, let me prophesy:    The blood of English shall manure the ground,    And future ages groan for this foul act;    Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,    And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars    Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;    Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny    Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd    The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.    O, if you raise this house against this house,    It will the woefullest division prove    That ever fell upon this cursed earth.    Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,    Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!
How now? What meanst thou, that thou helpst me not?By heavens, the duke shall know how slack you have been.
Oh, my dear Cassio!My sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee    From plume-pluck'd Richard;   who with willing soul    Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields    To the possession of thy royal hand:    Ascend his throne, descending now from him;    And long live Henry, fourth of that name!
[as LUCENTIO]  Not so well appareled as I wish you were.
Fie, fie! Unknit that threat'ning unkind brow    And dart not scornful glances from those eyes    To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor.    It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,    Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,    And in no sense is meet or amiable.    A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,    Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty,    And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty    Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.    Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,    Thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee,    And for thy maintenance commits his body    To painful labor both by sea and land,    To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,    Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe,    And craves no other tribute at thy hands    But love, fair looks and true obedience    Too little payment for so great a debt.    Such duty as the subject owes the prince,    Even such a woman oweth to her husband.    And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,    And not obedient to his honest will,    What is she but a foul contending rebel    And graceless traitor to her loving lord?    I am ashamed that women are so simple    To offer war where they should kneel for peace;    Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway    When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.    Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,    Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,    But that our soft conditions and our hearts    Should well agree with our external parts?    Come, come, you froward and unable worms!    My mind hath been as big as one of yours,    My heart as great, my reason haply more,    To bandy word for word and frown for frown.    But now I see our lances are but straws,    Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,    That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.    Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,    And place your hands below your husbands foot:    In token of which duty, if he please,    My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
And I will follow, more to cross that loveThan hate for Silvia that is gone for love.
Shall satisfy your father.
So thrive my soul
Let it flow this way, my good lord.
Indeed, I should have asked thee that before.
I will be angry. What hast thou to do?Father, be quiet. He shall stay my leisure.
What mean you, sir?
Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stayFor nothing but his majesty's approach.
A god on earth thou art.
Some dungeon.
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,    That know the strong'st and surest way to get.    Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;    Tears show their love, but want their remedies.    Cousin, I am too young to be your father,    Though you are old enough to be my heir.    What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;    For do we must what force will have us do.    Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?
Kill me tomorrowlet me live tonight!
Mark but the badges of these men, my lords,    Then say if they be true.     [indicates CALIBAN]      This misshapen knave,    His mother was a witch, and one so strong    That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs,    And deal in her command without her power.    These three have robbed me, and this demi-devil    For hes a bastard onehad plotted with them    To take my life.   Two of these fellows you    Must know and own. This thing of darkness I    Acknowledge mine.
I say, it is not lost.
Tush, thou art deceived.Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Methought I had, and often did I strive    To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood    Stopped in my soul   and would not let it forth    To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air,    But smothered it within my panting bulk,    Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
What thou wilt,Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smileThan hew to't with thy sword.
And mine a hundred and forty.
Therefore, so please thee to return with us    And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take    The captainship,   thou shalt be met with thanks,    Allow'd with absolute power and thy good name    Live with authority:   so soon we shall drive back    Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,    Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up    His country's peace.
How?
I may not answer.
I know thee too; and more than that I know thee,    I not desire to know. Follow thy drum;    With man's blood paint the ground, gules, gules:    Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;    Then what should war be?   This fell whore of thine    Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,    For all her cherubim look.
What is he, Biondello?
Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wishto make one there.
We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!
Lady, a happy evening!
For I have heard it saidThere is an art which in their piedness sharesWith great creating nature.
Thou'rt i' the right. Go, sir, rub your chain with crumbs. A stoup of wine, Maria!
If twere no other
Is it good een?
[to ALONSO]  Sir, we were talking that our garments seemnow as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen.
What, that my leg is too long?
Nay, thats not so.
I thank your Honor.
Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?
[to ALONSO]  Therefore, my lord
But repetition of what thou hast marred.That will I make before I let thee go.
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow!    He should have struck, not spoke;   or that these pirates,    Not enough barbarous, had not o'erboard thrown me    For to seek my mother!
What, shall I stab him as he sleeps?
Lets all sink wi' th' king.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,    Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel!    Will they not hear?   What, ho! You men, you beasts,    That quench the fire of your pernicious rage    With purple fountains issuing from your veins,    On pain of torture, from those bloody hands    Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,    And hear the sentence of your movèd prince.    Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,    By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,    Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets    And made Veronas ancient Citizens    Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments,    To wield old partisans in hands as old,    Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.    If ever you disturb our streets again,    Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.    For this time, all the rest depart away.    You, Capulet, shall go along with me,    And, Montague, come you this afternoon    To know our farther pleasure in this case,    To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.    Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
In happy time, Iago.
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?
O sir, such a life with such a wife were strange!    But if you have a stomach, to t, i' Gods name:    You shall have me assisting you in all.  But will you woo this wildcat?
Make me a willow cabin at your gate    And call upon my soul within the house.    Write loyal cantons of contemned love    And sing them loud even in the dead of night.    Halloo your name to the reverberate hills    And make the babbling gossip of the air    Cry out Olivia!   Oh, you should not rest    Between the elements of air and earth,    But you should pity me.
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findest him. I would we were well rid of this knavery.    If he may be conveniently delivered, I would he were, for I am now so far in offense with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot.   Come by and by to my chamber.
Ah sir, ah sir. Deaths the end of all.
Very true, and but a month old.
Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.
Ha!
Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montagues men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,    Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:    Which elder days shall ripen and confirm    To more approved service and desert.
'Tis he. God and Saint Stephen give you good den:I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.
I warrant you, my lord, more grace than boy.
They, for their truth, might better wear their headsThan some that have accused them wear their hats. But come, my lord, lets away.
'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived    From some forefather grief;   mine is not so,    For nothing had begot my something grief;    Or something hath the nothing that I grieve:    'Tis in reversion that I do possess;    But what it is, that is not yet known; what    I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.
His nurse? Why, she was dead ere thou wast born.
Would you have a love song or a song of good life?
Great king, within this coffin I present    Thy buried fear:   herein all breathless lies    The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,    Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.
There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried;The motto thus, 'Sic spectanda fides.'
I do not know. Friends all but now, even now,    In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom    Divesting them for bed.   And then, but now,    As if some planet had unwitted men,    Swords out, and tilting one at others breasts    In opposition bloody.   I cannot speak    Any beginning to this peevish odds,    And would in action glorious I had lost    Those legs that brought me to a part of it.
And as for Pericles,    What should he say? We wept after her hearse,    And yet we mourn: her monument    Is almost finish'd,   and her epitaphs    In glittering golden characters express    A general praise to her, and care in us    At whose expense 'tis done.
A rhyme I learned even nowOf one I danced withal.
I should sinTo think but nobly of my grandmother.Good wombs have borne bad sons.
Base men by his endowments are made great.
And so had mine.
For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.    Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,    How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.
I did not think    Thou couldst have spoke so well; ne'er dream'd thou couldst.    Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,    Thy speech had alter'd it.   Hold, here's gold for thee:    Persever in that clear way thou goest,    And the gods strengthen thee!
I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
And, Ill warrant her, full of game.
But died thy sister of her love, my boy?
I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure    I count myself in nothing else so happy    As in a soul remembering my good friends;    And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,    It shall be still thy true love's recompense:    My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
Who brought it?
And you shall be satisfied.
O, swear not by the moon, th inconstant moon, That monthly changes in her circle orb,Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Now Jove afford you cause!    To me the difference forges dread;   your greatness    Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble    To think your father, by some accident,    Should pass this way as you did:   O, the Fates!    How would he look, to see his work so noble    Vilely bound up? What would he say?   Or how    Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold    The sternness of his presence?
I fear me, never.
[Aside]  I scarce know how.
Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the airWith secrets.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,    And fearst to die? Famine is in thy cheeks.    Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes.    Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.    The world is not thy friend nor the worlds law.    The world affords no law to make thee rich.    Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.    [Holds out money]
All places that the eye of heaven visits    Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.    Teach thy necessity to reason thus;    There is no virtue like necessity.    Think not the king did banish thee,    But thou the king.   Woe doth the heavier sit,    Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.    Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour    And not the king exiled thee;   or suppose    Devouring pestilence hangs in our air    And thou art flying to a fresher clime:    Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it    To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest:    Suppose the singing birds musicians,    The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,    The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more    Than a delightful measure or a dance;    For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite    The man that mocks at it and sets it light.
As near as I could sift him on that argument,    On some apparent danger seen in him    Aim'd at your highness,     no inveterate malice.
Come, the gods have done their part in you.
[as CAMBIO]   Whate'er I read to her, Ill plead for you    As for my patron, stand you so assured,    As firmly as yourself were still in place,  Yea, and perhaps with more successful wordsThan you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
Whats that to thee?
Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,I know not what I shall incur to pass it,Having no warrant.
A little, by your favor.
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair of boots that have been candle cases,   one buckled, another laced;   an old rusty sword ta'en out of the town armory, with a broken hilt and chapeless; with two broken points;   his horse hipped, with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred,     besides possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten,     near-legged before and with a half-checked bit and a headstall of sheeps leather, which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hathbeen often burst, and now repaired with knots, one girth six times pieced, and a womans crupper of velour,which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.
I will, my lord.
I will then give it you soundly.
[To LUCENTIO]  In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Oh, heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself?
Go to! Say no more.
(  aside  ) Ay, or Ill cudgel him and make him cry O!
Here, my lord, in readiness.
Nay, lay thee down and roar,For thou hast killed the sweetest innocentThat e'er did lift up eye.
Ill teach you how to flow.
Lay it by too: another.
Come with a thought. I thank thee, Ariel. Come.
Both too; and women's sons.
(  aside  ) I knew twas I, for many do call me fool.
[waking] Why, how now? Ho, awake!
We attend his lordship; pray, signify so much.
[to GONZALO]  Nay, good my lord, be not angry.
What means this scene of rude impatience?
Heres a change indeed!
A great suspicion. Stay the friar too.
Upon mine honor, sir, I heard a humming,    And that a strange one too, which did awake me.    I shaked you, sir, and cried.   As mine eyes opened,    I saw their weapons drawn. There was a noise,    Thats verily.   'Tis best we stand upon our guard,    Or that we quit this place. Lets draw our weapons.
Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons anddaughters will be all gentlemen born.
But do you hear, sir, have you married my daughter without asking my goodwill?
Satisfy!    The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!    Let that suffice.   I have trusted thee, Camillo,    With all the nearest things to my heart, as well    My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou    Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed    Thy penitent reform'd:   but we have been    Deceived in thy integrity, deceived    In that which seems so.
[aside]  Which God revenge!
But one fiend at a time,Ill fight their legions o'er.
And look to have it yielded with all kindness.Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwardsWe may digest our complots in some form.
I pray you, hear her speak.    If she confess that she was half the wooer,    Destruction on my head if my bad blame    Light on the man.   Come hither, gentle mistress.    Do you perceive in all this noble company    Where most you owe obedience?
What,To kiss in private?
[Aside]  She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
Now, fellow,What is there?
Be it so. Amen.
Not a jot, not a jot.
If thou hatest curses,Stay not; fly, whilst thou art blest and free:Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
I would not follow him then.
Shake it off. Come on.    Well visit Caliban, my slave who never    Yields us kind answer.
Shall I go fetch your nightgown?
Nor no one here, for curses never passThe lips of those that breathe them in the air.
From all such devils, good Lord, deliver us!
Oh, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
And turns the sun to shade. Alas, alas,    Witness my son, now in the shade of death,    Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath    Hath in eternal darkness folded up.    Your aerie buildeth in our aeries nest.    O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!    As it was won with blood, lost be it so.
(to the attendant)    Do thou meet me presently at the harbor.    (to RODERIGO)    Come hither. If thou best valiant, as they say base men being in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them, list me.   The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.
Give me breath.I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on;I'll wait upon you instantly.
An you love me, lets do t. I am dog at a catch.
'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,    Which I have recovered from the Moor.    Come, guard the door without. Let him not pass,    But kill him rather. Ill after that same villain,    For tis a damnèd slave.
I say, without characters fame lives long.  [aside]  Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,I moralize two meanings in one word.
With loves light wings did I oerperch these walls,    For stony limits cannot hold love out,    And what love can do, that dares love attempt.    Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.
We are the queens abjects and must obey.    Brother, farewell.   I will unto the king,    And whatsoe'er you will employ me in,    Were it to call King Edwards widow sister,    I will perform it to enfranchise you.    Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood    Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
[To ABRAHAM]  Yes, better, sir.
I beseech your honor,Vouchsafe me a word; it does concern you near.
All comfort that the dark night can affordBe to thy person, noble father-in-law. Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
The curse my noble father laid on thee    When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper,    And with thy scorns drewst rivers from his eyes,    And then, to dry them, gavst the duke a clout    Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland    His curses then, from bitterness of soul    Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee,    And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
She hangs about his neck:If she pertain to life let her speak too.
Admired Miranda!    Indeed the top of admiration, worth    Whats dearest to th' world!   Full many a lady    I have eyed with best regard and many a time    Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage    Brought my too diligent ear.   For several virtues    Have I liked several women. Never any    With so full soul but some defect in her    Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed    And put it to the foil.   But you, O you,    So perfect and so peerless, are created    Of every creatures best.
Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a    sojourner we have; you'll lose nothing by custom.    When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good    turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou    hast the harvest out of thine own report.
She's such a one, that, were I well assured    Came of a gentle kind and noble stock,    I'ld wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed.    Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty    Expect even here, where is a kingly patient:    If that thy prosperous and artificial feat    Can draw him but to answer thee in aught,    Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay    As thy desires can wish.
Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing,And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.
Look behind you, my lord.
O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.    Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain;    The spinsters and the knitters in the sun    And the free maids that weave their thread with bones    Do use to chant it   . It is silly sooth,    And dallies with the innocence of love,    Like the old age.
He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjectsthe name of good by his government. How far is hiscourt distant from this shore?
The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams    That ever entered in a drowsy head    Have I since your departure had, my lords.    Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murdered    Came to my tent and cried on victory.    I promise you, my soul is very jocund    In the remembrance of so fair a dream.    How far into the morning is it, lords?
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh,how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in.   Laura to his lady was but a kitchen-wench marry, she had a better love to berhyme her   Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy, Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose.    Signior Romeo, bonjour! Theres a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
'Tis grace indeed.Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;The other for some while a friend.
Ill come to him.
My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, wholately came from the king, commands the contrary.
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,    And quite lost their hearts:   the nobles hath he fined    For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
No better.
You said you would believe me;But, not to be a troubler of your peace,I will end here.
Look thee, 'tis so! Thou singly honest man,    Here, take: the gods out of my misery    Have sent thee treasure.   Go, live rich and happy;    But thus condition'd: thou shalt build from men;    Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,    But let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone,    Ere thou relieve the beggar; give to dogs    What thou deny'st to men; let prisons swallow 'em,    Debts wither 'em to nothing;   be men like    blasted woods,    And may diseases lick up their false bloods!    And so farewell and thrive.
[to FERDINAND]    Be of comfort.    My fathers of a better nature, sir,    Than he appears by speech.   This is unwonted    Which now came from him.
Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed.
Servant-monster? The folly of this island. They say theres but five upon this isle. We are three of them. If th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.
Take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room.
Here.
Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come again.    I go, sir, but I would not have you to think that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness.   But, as yousay, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I will awake it anon.
As she lived peerless,    So her dead likeness, I do well believe,    Excels whatever yet you look'd upon    Or hand of man hath done;   therefore I keep it    Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare    To see the life as lively mock'd as ever    Still sleep mock'd death:   behold, and say 'tis well.    [PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE standing like a statue]  I like your silence, it the more shows offYour wonder: but yet speak; first, you, my liege,Comes it not something near?
That's not feigned; he is so.
At all times alike    Men are not still the same: 'twas time and griefs    That framed him thus:   time, with his fairer hand,    Offering the fortunes of his former days,    The former man may make him. Bring us to him,    And chance it as it may.
Tis torture and not mercy. Heaven is here,    Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog    And little mouse, every unworthy thing,    Live here in heaven and may look on her,    But Romeo may not.   More validity,    More honorable state, more courtship lives    In carrion flies than Romeo.   They may seize    On the white wonder of dear Juliets hand    And steal immortal blessing from her lips,    Who even in pure and vestal modesty,    Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.    But Romeo may not. He is banishèd.    Flies may do this, but I from this must fly.    They are free men, but I am banishèd.    And sayst thou yet that exile is not death?    Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife,    No sudden mean of death, though neer so mean,    But banishèd to kill me?Banishèd!    O Friar, the damnèd use that word in hell.    Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,    Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,    A sin-absolver, and my friend professed,    To mangle me with that word banishèd?
And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong as any man in Illyria.
[as CAMBIO]  Mistress, whats your opinion of your sister?
As merry as you will.
Nay, certainly to-night;    For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough    That threw her in the sea.   Make a fire within:    Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.
You will not then?
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; andthen, death, death!
Depress'd he is already, and deposed    'Tis doubt he will be:   letters came last night    To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's,    That tell black tidings.
Thats he that was Othello. Here I am.
Art not thou the Lady Olivias fool?
'Tis truly so.
Signior, it is the Moor.
Trouble him no further; thus you still shall find him.
Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like themanner of your garments well.
Not for becauseYour brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,Become some women best, so that there be notToo much hair there, but in a semicircleOr a half-moon made with a pen.
Infer fair Englands peace by this alliance.
My masters.
So please you, sir, their speedHath been beyond account.
[as LITIO]   Madam, before you touch the instrument,    To learn the order of my fingering    I must begin with rudiments of art,    To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,    More pleasant, pithy, and effectual    Than hath been taught by any of my trade.    And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
Ill not have it so.
To whom?
I dare be sworn    These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king,    beshrew them!    He must be told on't, and he shall: the office    Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me:    If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister    And never to my red-look'd anger be    The trumpet any more.   Pray you, Emilia,    Commend my best obedience to the queen:    If she dares trust me with her little babe,    I'll show't the king and undertake to be    Her advocate to the loud'st.   We do not know    How he may soften at the sight o' the child:    The silence often of pure innocence    Persuades when speaking fails.
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed    With ravens feather from unwholesome fen    Drop on you both!   A southwest blow on ye    And blister you all o'er!
I never practised it.
And daily new exactions are devised,    As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:    But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?
(handing a paper)       Lady, you have. Pray you, peruse that letter.    You must not now deny it is your hand.    Write from it if you can, in hand or phrase;    Or say tis not your seal, not your invention:    You can say none of this.   Well, grant it then    And tell me, in the modesty of honor,    Why you have given me such clear lights of favor,    Bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you,    To put on yellow stockings, and to frown    Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people?    And, acting this in an obedient hope,    Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,    Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,    And made the most notorious geck and gull    That e'er invention played on? Tell me why.
Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must take out the work?   A likelypiece of work, that you should find it in your chamber,and not know who left it there! This is some minxs token, and I must take out the work? There, give it yourhobby-horse. Wheresoever you had it, Ill take out no work on t.
Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,After your late tossing on the breaking seas?
Hark, Petruchio: she says shell see thee hanged first.
How does my bounteous sister? Go with meTo bless this twain that they may prosperous be,And honored in their issue.
[To VIOLA]  A sister! You are she.
[to the bishops]  Come, let us to our holy task again.Farewell, my cousin. Farewell, gentle friends.
She took the ring of me. Ill none of it.
Not worth my thinking. How now, poet!
(  sings  )  His eyes do show his days are almost done.
The empress, the midwife, and yourself:Two may keep counsel when the third's away:Go to the empress, tell her this I said.
Stanley, what news with you?
[reads]  Jove knows I love,But who?Lips, do not move; No man must know.No man must know. What follows? The numbers altered. No man must know. If this should be thee, Malvolio?
Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?
I cannot speakSo well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut outThe purity of his.
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
My mother had a maid called Barbary,    She was in love, and he she loved proved mad    And did forsake her.   She had a song of Willow,    An old thing twas, but it expressed her fortune    And she died singing it.   That song tonight    Will not go from my mind. I have much to do    But to go hang my head all at one side    And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.
'Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea.Well, there's for you: leave us.
Now, by my holidam, here comes Katherina!
Go fetch them hither. If they deny to come,Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
Come, go along and see the truth hereof,For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
Yet
Painting is welcome.    The painting is almost the natural man;    or since dishonour traffics with man's nature,    He is but outside:   these pencill'd figures are    Even such as they give out. I like your work;    And you shall find I like it: wait attendance    Till you hear further from me.
Lets hear.  [he plays]  O fie! The treble jars.
'Tis common:    A thousand moral paintings I can show    That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's    More pregnantly than words.   Yet you do well    To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen    The foot above the head.
Oh, thereby hangs a tail.
But yet I love my country, and am notOne that rejoices in the common wreck,As common bruit doth put it.
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
What must the king do now? must he submit?    The king shall do it: must he be deposed?    The king shall be contented: must he lose    The name of king? o' God's name, let it go:    I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,    My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,    My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,    My figured goblets for a dish of wood,    My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff,    My subjects for a pair of carved saints    And my large kingdom for a little grave,    A little little grave, an obscure grave;    Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,    Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet    May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;    For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;    And buried once, why not upon my head?    Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin!    We'll make foul weather with despised tears;    Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,    And make a dearth in this revolting land.    Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,    And make some pretty match with shedding tears?    As thus, to drop them still upon one place,    Till they have fretted us a pair of graves    Within the earth; and, therein laid,there lies    Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.    Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see    I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.    Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,    What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty    Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?    You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
A witty mother! Witless else her son.
By the world,    I think my wife be honest and think she is not.    I think that thou art just and think thou art not.    Ill have some proof.   Her name, that was as fresh    As Dians visage, is now begrimed and black    As mine own face. If there be cords or knives,    Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,    Ill not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
Master, a marcantant, or a pedant, I know not what, but formal in apparel,In gait and countenance surely like a father.
Ancient, what makes he here?
I do attend here on the generalAnd think it no addition, nor my wish,To have him see me womaned.
But, hark! What noise?
Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned. Your widow-dolor likewise be unwept!
And mine shall.    Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling    Of their afflictions, and shall not myself,    One of their kind, that relish all as sharply    Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art?    Though with their high wrongs I am struck to th' quick,    Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury    Do I take part.   The rarer action is    In virtue than in vengeance. They being penitent,    The sole drift of my purpose doth extend    Not a frown further.   Go release them, Ariel.    My charms Ill break, their senses Ill restore,    And they shall be themselves.
What, Patch-breech, I say!
[presenting a paper]  Heres the challenge, read it. Warrant theres vinegar and pepper in t.
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:On what condition stands it and wherein?
[seeing MIRANDA]    Most sure, the goddess    On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer    May know if you remain upon this island,    And that you will some good instruction give    How I may bear me here.   My prime request,    Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!    If you be maid or no.
My heart is ever at your service, my lord.
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.
Why came I hither but to that intent?    Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?    Have I not in my time heard lions roar?    Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds,    Rage like an angry boar chafèd with sweat?    Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,    And heavens artillery thunder in the skies?    Have I not in a pitchèd battle heard    Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?    And do you tell me of a womans tongue    That gives not half so great a blow to hear    As will a chestnut in a farmers fire?    Tush, tush! Fear boys with bugs.
I mean, sir, in delay.    We waste our lights in vain, like lights by day.    Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits    Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
You shall have none ill, sir, for Ill try if they can lick their fingers.
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours.Too late he died that might have kept that title, Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
Musicians, O musicians, Hearts Ease, Hearts Ease.O, an you will have me live, play Hearts Ease.
You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's seethese four threes of herdsmen.
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?
Good mother, be content; it is no moreThan my poor life must answer.
Aumerle that was;    But that is lost for being Richard's friend,    And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:    I am in parliament pledge for his truth    And lasting fealty to the new-made king.
I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks he hathno drowning mark upon him. His complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging.   Make therope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage. If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.
(  aside  ) Out, scab!
Make way, unruly woman!
No;You shall not make me welcome:I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
You undergo too strict a paradox,    Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:    Your words have took such pains as if they labour'd    To bring manslaughter into form and set quarrelling    Upon the head of valour;   which indeed    Is valour misbegot and came into the world    When sects and factions were newly born:    He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer    The worst that man can breathe, and make his wrongs    His outsides, to wear them like his raiment,    carelessly,    And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,    To bring it into danger.    If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,    What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!
Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
Some such thingI said, and said no more but what my thoughtsDid warrant me was likely.
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,    Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,    And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,    So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
Barely in title, not in revenue.
By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. I had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has.   [To th    e  FOOL   ]   In sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last night when thou spokest of Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus. 'Twas very good, i' faith.   I sent thee sixpence for thy leman. Hadst it?
Give me thy hand.
What one, my lord?
Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
A thing slipp'd idly from me.    Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes    From whence 'tis nourish'd:   the fire i' the flint    Shows not till it be struck; our gentle flame    Provokes itself and like the current flies    Each bound it chafes. What have you there?
Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies;    There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,    And secretly to greet the empress' friends.    Come on, you thick lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence;    For it is you that puts us to our shifts:    I'll make you feed on berries and on roots,    And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,    And cabin in a cave, and bring you up    To be a warrior, and command a camp.
O my friends,    I have one word to say to you:   look you, my good lord,    I must entreat you, honour me so much    As to advance this jewel; accept it and wear it,    Kind my lord.
I do, and surely    It is a sleepy language, and thou speakst    Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?    This is a strange repose, to be asleep    With eyes wide open, standing, speaking, moving,    And yet so fast asleep.
O my brother,    Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir    Afresh within me, and these thy offices,    So rarely kind, are as interpreters    Of my behind-hand slackness.   Welcome hither,    As is the spring to the earth.   And hath he too    Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,    At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,    To greet a man not worth her pains, much less    The adventure of her person?
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant, avirtuous Where is your mother?
[t    o  SIR TOBY BELCH   ]  La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart! Pray God, he be not bewitched!
It may not be.
[aside]  These be fine things, an if they be not sprites. Thats a brave god and bears celestial liquor. I will kneel to him.
What dost thou know?
Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds,    Rather than make unprofited return.
No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect.    The enemies' drum is heard, and fearful scouring    Doth choke the air with dust: in, and prepare:    Ours is the fall, I fear; our foes the snare.
Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king,
I know them both; th' other's a jeweller.
This is as t should be.Let me see the county.    Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.    Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar!    Our whole city is much bound to him.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.
Rub him about the temples.
Death, that hath taen her hence to make me wail,Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Lie with her? lie on her? We say lie on her when theybelie her! Lie with herthats fulsome. Handkerchiefconfessionshandkerchief!   To confess, and be hanged for his labor.   First to be hanged, and then toconfessI tremble at it   .   Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some instruction. It is not words that shake me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips. Is t possible? Confess!Handkerchief!Oh, devil!
Here, madam, at your service.
Draw near,    And list what with our council we have done.    For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd    With that dear blood which it hath fostered;    And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect    Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword;    And for we think the eagle-winged pride    Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,    With rival-hating envy, set on you    To wake our peace,   which in our country's cradle    Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;    Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,    With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,    And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,    Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace    And make us wade even in our kindred's blood,    Therefore, we banish you our territories:    You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,    Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields    Shall not regreet our fair dominions,    But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul. So from thy souls love didst thou love her brothers,And from my hearts love I do thank thee for it.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?
May we not see him?
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.
What! This gentleman will out-talk us all.
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him.   He knows not yet of his honorable fortune. If you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure.   I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me.   I will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high suppertime, and the night grows to waste. About it!
'Ad Jovem,' that's for you: here, 'Ad Apollinem:'    'Ad Martem,' that's for myself:    Here, boy, to Pallas: here, to Mercury:    To Saturn, Caius, not to Saturnine;    You were as good to shoot against the wind.    To it, boy! Marcus, loose when I bid.    Of my word, I have written to effect;    There's not a god left unsolicited.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I;    I hold him but a fool that will endanger    His body for a girl that loves him not:    I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
Good morrow, Richmond.
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,    To be full like me: yet they say we are    Almost as like as eggs; women say so,    That will say anything but were they false    As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false    As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes    No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true    To say this boy were like me.   Come, sir page,    Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!    Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?may't be?    Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:    Thou dost make possible things not so held,    Communicatest with dreams;how can this be?    With what's unreal thou coactive art,    And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent    Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,    And that beyond commission, and I find it,    And that to the infection of my brains    And hardening of my brows.
Lets to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for more money.
How now! what news?
Pardon him, sweet Timandra; for his wits    Are drown'd and lost in his calamities.    I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,    The want whereof doth daily make revolt    In my penurious band:   I have heard, and grieved,    How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,    Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states,    But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them,
What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?
Are you sure of that?
Good queen!
Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,From where you do remain let paper show.
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
Hold, then. Go home, be merry. Give consent    To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.    Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone.    Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.    [Shows her a vial]    Take thou this vial, being then in bed,    And this distillèd liquor drink thou off,    When presently through all thy veins shall run    A cold and drowsy humor, for no pulse    Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.    No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.    The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade    To wanny ashes, thy eyes windows fall    Like death when he shuts up the day of life.    Each part, deprived of supple government,    Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death.    And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death    Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,    And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.    Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes    To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.    Then, as the manner of our country is,    In thy best robes uncovered on the bier    Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault    Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.    In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,    Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,    And hither shall he come, and he and I    Will watch thy waking, and that very night    Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.    And this shall free thee from this present shame,    If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,    Abate thy valor in the acting it.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Once more, take her hence.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight. Grief of my sons exile hath stopped her breath.What further woe conspires against mine age?
Do not torment me. Oh!
No; if I mistakeIn those foundations which I build upon,The centre is not big enough to bearA school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!He who shall speak for her is afar off guiltyBut that he speaks.
Faith, I can cut a caper.
Have done, have done.
Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again.    I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins    That almost freezes up the heat of life.    I'll call them back again to comfort me.    Nurse!What should she do here?    My dismal scene I needs must act alone.    Come, vial.   [Holds out the vial]   What if this mixture do not work at all?    Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?    No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.    [Lays down a knife]    What if it be a poison which the friar    Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,    Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored    Because he married me before to Romeo?    I fear it isand yet methinks it should not,    For he hath still been tried a holy man.    How if, when I am laid into the tomb,    I wake before the time that Romeo    Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point.    Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,    To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,    And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?    Or, if I live, is it not very like    The horrible conceit of death and night,    Together with the terror of the place    As in a vault, an ancient receptacle    Where for this many hundred years the bones    Of all my buried ancestors are packed;    Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,    Lies fest'ring in his shroud;   where, as they say,    At some hours in the night spirits resort    Alack, alack, is it not like that I,    So early wakingwhat with loathsome smells,    And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,    That living mortals, hearing them, run mad    O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,    Environèd with all these hideous fears,    And madly play with my forefathers' joints,    And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,    And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone    As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?    O, look! Methinks I see my cousin's ghost    Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body    Upon a rapier's point.   Stay, Tybalt, stay!    Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here's drink. I drink to thee.
And to that end we wished your Lordship hereT' avoid the censures of the carping world.
O, ay; and pities them.
Find them out whose names are written here? It is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his penciland the painter with his nets.   But I am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned in good time!
Well, madam, and in health.
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in thesea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
What fit is this, good lady?
Adieu, brave Moor. Use Desdemona well.
Come hither: pray you,    How goes the world,   that I am thus encounter'd    With clamourous demands of date-broke bonds,    And the detention of long-since-due debts,    Against my honour?
The note lies in s throat, if he say I said so.
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
What says his majesty?
If Tamora entreat him, then he will:    For I can smooth and fill his aged ear    With golden promises;   that, were his heart    Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,    Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.     [To AEMILIUS]       Go thou before, be our ambassador:    Say that the emperor requests a parley    Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting    Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.
And is it thus? Repays he my deep service    With such deep contempt? Made I him king for this?    O, let me think on Hastings and be gone    To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,     (Beats him)     That feedst me with the very name of meat.    Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you    That triumph thus upon my misery.    Go, get thee gone, I say.
Farewell, sweet masters both. I must be gone.
Now, wheres my wife?
My masters, are you mad? Or what are you?   Have you no wit, manners, nor honesty but to gabble like tinkers at this time of night?   Do you make an alehouse of my ladyshouse, that you squeak out your coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice?   Is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?
His health is well sir.
Villain, what hast thou done?
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
I say a devil. Thinkst thou, Hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
Which, to preserve mine honour, I'll perform.
And that's the wavering commons:   for their love    Lies in their purses,   and whoso empties them    By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
What, with my tongue in your tail? Nay, come again,Good Kate. I am a gentleman.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.
I take all and your several visitations    So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give;    Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends,    And ne'er be weary.   Alcibiades,    Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich;    It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living    Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast    Lie in a pitch'd field.
You are right courteous knights.
I scorn thy meat; 'twould choke me, for I should    ne'er flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of    men eat Timon, and he sees 'em not!   It grieves me    to see so many dip their meat in one man's blood;    and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.    I wonder men dare trust themselves with men:    Methinks they should invite them without knives;    Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.    There's much example for't; the fellow that sits    next him now, parts bread with him, pledges the    breath of him in a divided draught, is the readiest    man to kill him: 't has been proved.   If I were a    huge man, I should fear to drink at meals;    Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes:    Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
Ay, marry, what is he?
You must not enter.
It pleaseth you, my royal father, to expressMy commendations great, whose merit's less.
Ay, my lord, this same.How now, Malvolio!
What dost thou think 'tis worth?
For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one presently to SirToby.
Who governs here?
Fear her not, Lucius: somewhat doth she mean:    See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee:    Somewhither would she have thee go with her.    Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care    Read to her sons than she hath read to thee    Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,And never borrow any tear of thee.
Should beshould buzz!
No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle wordsTill time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.
And tell us what occasion of importHath all so long detained you from your wifeAnd sent you hither so unlike yourself.
Romeo can,Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it;    For who digs hills because they do aspire    Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher.    O my distressed lord, even such our griefs are;    Here they're but felt, and seen with mischief's eyes,    But like to groves, being topp'd, they higher rise.
There is no other way,Unless thou couldst put on some other shape And not be Richard, that hath done all this.
That you ask me what you are, and do not knowyourselves. Speak to 'em, fool.
My liege, the duke of Buckingham is taken.    That is the best news.   That the earl of Richmond    Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,    Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
Why, my young cousin? It is good to grow.
That, being mad herself, shes madly mated.
Sir, I thinkYou have heard of my poor services, i' the loveThat I have borne your father?
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.    My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:    The one my duty owes; but my fair name,    Despite of death that lives upon my grave,    To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.    I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here,    Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,    The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood    Which breathed this poison.
Pluck up thy spirits. Look cheerfully upon me.    Here love, thou seest how diligent I am,    To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee.    I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.    What, not a word?   Nay, then thou lovst it not    And all my pains is sorted to no proof.    Here, take away this dish.
Sweet Sir Andrew!
Go, Lovell, with all speed to Doctor Shaw.  [to RATCLIFFE]  Go thou to Friar Penker. Bid them bothMeet me within this hour at Baynards Castle.
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husbandAs if the cause were his.
Oh my fair warrior!
[within]   I do beseech youThat I may speak with you, O good my lord!
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death    I spy life peering;   but I dare not say    How near the tidings of our comfort is.
You will be schoolmasterAnd undertake the teaching of the maid:Thats your device.
'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advisesus; not to have us thrive in our mystery.
Romeo, away, be gone!    The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.    Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death    If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
By my troth, I am glad on t.
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?
Well.
[Reads]   Hermione, queen to the worthy    Leontes, king of Sicilia, thou art here accused and    arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery    with Polixenes, king of Bohemia, and conspiring    with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign    lord the king, thy royal husband:   the pretence    whereof being by circumstances partly laid open,    thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance    of a true subject, didst counsel and aid them, for    their better safety, to fly away by night.
I accuse them not.
I am an humble suitor to your virtues;    For pity is the virtue of the law,    And none but tyrants use it cruelly.    It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy    Upon a friend of mine, who, in hot blood,    Hath stepp'd into the law, which is past depth    To those that, without heed, do plunge into 't.    He is a man, setting his fate aside,    Of comely virtues:    Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice    An honour in him which buys out his fault    But with a noble fury and fair spirit,    Seeing his reputation touch'd to death,    He did oppose his foe:    And with such sober and unnoted passion    He did behave his anger, ere 'twas spent,    As if he had but proved an argument.
How does the boy?
Bid my guard watch. Leave me. Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tentAnd help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,    Than this weak arm:   discomfort guides my tongue    And bids me speak of nothing but despair.    One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,    Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:    O, call back yesterday, bid time return,    And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!    To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,    O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:    For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.    Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.
Pure Dian, bless thee for thy vision! I    Will offer night-oblations to thee.   Thaisa,    This prince, the fair-betrothed of your daughter,    Shall marry her at Pentapolis.   And now,    This ornament    Makes me look dismal will I clip to form;    And what this fourteen years no razor touch'd,    To grace thy marriage-day, I'll beautify.
I know not what to say, but give me your hands.God send you joy, Petruchio. 'Tis a match.
But is this true, or is it else your pleasure,Like pleasant travelers, to break a jestUpon the company you overtake?
I swear Ill cuff you if you strike again.
Lo, now, lo!    Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me    For bringing wood in slowly. Ill fall flat.    Perchance he will not mind me.    [lies down, covered by his gaberdine]
As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters.   And yet I will not compare with anold man.
If youll come to supper tonight, you may. If you will not, come when you are next prepared for.
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device,man.
[t    o  MALVOLIO   ]  Why, how now, my bawcock! How dost thou, chuck?
My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.
Had I been seized by a hungry lion,    I would have been a breakfast to the beast,    Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.    O, Heaven be judge how I love Valentine,    Whose life's as tender to me as my soul!    And full as much, for more there cannot be,    I do detest false perjured Proteus.    Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.
Pray heartily he be at palace.
In vain! his service doneAt Lacedaemon and ByzantiumWere a sufficient briber for his life.
O lamentable day!
Tranio, you jest. But have you both forsworn me?
Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun. It shines everywhere.   I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress: Ithink I saw your wisdom there.
We know him for no less, though we are but strangers    to him.   But I can tell you one thing, my lord, and    which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timon's    happy hours are done and past, and his estate    shrinks from him.
One of Lord Timon's men.
I thank thee. Mariner, say what coast is this?
Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave:Fear not; he bears an honourable mind,And will not use a woman lawlessly.
Why have you not proclaim'd NorthumberlandAnd all the rest revolted faction traitors?
Before me, shes a good wench.
I do believe twas he.
I am much bound to you.
Yes, being kept together and put to use.
Now, the gods to-bless your honour!
Where shall I find you?
Ay.
Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bondslave?
'Faith, for the worst is filthy; and would not holdtaking, I doubt me.
By my heel, I care not.
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Would 'twere so!But not till I am dead. I'll say thou'st gold:Thou wilt be throng'd to shortly.
Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,    Of capital treason we arrest you here.    My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge    To keep him safely till his day of trial.    May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.
He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.
Where is your sister, and Hortensios wife?
Dost hate a medlar?
The best and truest;For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.
That Julius Caesar was a famous man.    With what his valor did enrich his wit,    His wit set down to make his valor live.    Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,    For now he lives in fame, though not in life.    Ill tell you what, my cousin Buckingham
Here is her fathers house, Ill call aloud.
Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true;    That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles    In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers,    The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments,    Like a false traitor and injurious villain.    Besides I say and will in battle prove,    Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge    That ever was survey'd by English eye,    That all the treasons for these eighteen years    Complotted and contrived in this land    Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.    Further I say and further will maintain    Upon his bad life to make all this good,    That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,    Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,    And consequently, like a traitor coward,    Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:    Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,    Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,    To me for justice and rough chastisement;    And, by the glorious worth of my descent,    This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
[as LUCENTIO]   Signior Hortensio, I have often heard    Of your entire affection to Bianca,    And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,    I will with you, if you be so contented,    Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
Iago hath direction what to do, But notwithstanding with my personal eyeWill I look to t.
I fear it.
[aside]  Honest lord,Thou hast said well, for some of you there presentAre worse than devils.
Yet thou didst kill my children.
How now, good fellow! wouldst thou speak with us?
What would you have me be, an I be not a woman?
(   singing)        The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,        Sing all a green willow.        Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,        Sing willow, willow, willow.        The fresh streams ran by her, and murmured her moans,        Sing willow, willow, willow.        Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones        Sing willow, willow, willow     Lay by these       Willow, willow     Prithee, hie thee, hell come anon       Sing all a green willow must be my garland.        Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve     Nay, thats not nextHark! Who is t that knocks?
God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.
Hes as tall a man as anys in Illyria.
I must believe you, sir:    I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't;    Provided that, when he's removed, your highness    Will take again your queen as yours at first,    Even for your son's sake;   and thereby for sealing    The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms    Known and allied to yours.
I prithee,    Remember I have done thee worthy service,    Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings,   served    Without or grudge or grumblings. Thou didst promise    To bate me a full year.
Here 'tis.
You tell me true.
I think, this coming summer, the King of Siciliameans to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone.    And yet no further than a wantons bird,    That lets it hop a little from his hand    Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,    And with a silken thread plucks it back again,    So loving-jealous of his liberty.
[as LUCENTIO]  Among them know you one Vincentio?
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.
I gave her such a one, twas my first gift.
What, dost thou weep? Come nearer. Then I    love thee,    Because thou art a woman,   and disclaim'st    Flinty mankind; whose eyes do never give    But thorough lust and laughter.   Pity's sleeping:    Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping!
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servants life,Who slew today a riotous gentlemanLately attendant on the duke of Norfolk.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
I have so: what of him?
Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tellWhom thou lovest best. See thou dissemble not.
Work on, My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught,    And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,    All guiltless, meet reproach.   What, ho! My lord!    My lord, I say! Othello!
Nor are they living    Who were the motives that you first went out;    Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess    Hath broke their hearts.   March, noble lord,    Into our city with thy banners spread:    By decimation, and a tithed death    If thy revenges hunger for that food    Which nature loathestake thou the destined tenth,    And by the hazard of the spotted die    Let die the spotted.
Roundly replied.
We are honour'd much by good Simonides.
I have been bold    For that I knew it the most general way    To them to use your signet and your name;    But they do shake their heads, and I am here    No richer in return.
[To SIR TOBY BELCH]  Let go thy hand.
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
Relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!
Yet you began rudely. What are you? What would you?
Why Romeo, art thou mad?
And then I comes behind.
How does thy honor? Let me lick thy shoe.   [indicates TRINCULO]  Ill not serve him. Hes not valiant.
At Pembroke, or at Ha'rfordwest in Wales.
O, 'tis too true.
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;Away with him! and let her sport herselfWith that she's big with; for 'tis PolixenesHas made thee swell thus.
My lord it shall be done.
Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha!    Thou shalt be loggerhead. Good faith, 'tis day.    The County will be here with music straight,    For so he said he would.
Why, sir, whats your conceit in that?
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!    Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight?    Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height    Before this out-dared dastard?   Ere my tongue    Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,    Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear    The slavish motive of recanting fear,    And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,    Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.
Ay, my lord; even soAs it is here set down.
Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland    To say 'King Richard':   alack the heavy day    When such a sacred king should hide his head.
With all my heart.
Thus strangers may be haled and abused.O monstrous villain!
I have heard it said so. Oh, these men, these men!    Dost thou in conscience thinktell me, Emilia    That there be women do abuse their husbands    In such gross kind?
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?    Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?    If haply you my father do suspect    An instrument of this your calling back,    Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,    Why, I have lost him too.
All have not offended;    For those that were, it is not square to take    On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands,    Are not inherited.   Then, dear countryman,    Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage:    Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin    Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall    With those that have offended:   like a shepherd,    Approach the fold and cull the infected forth,    But kill not all together.
When was this?
He hath found the meaning, for which we mean    To have his head.    He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,    Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin    In such a loathed manner;    And therefore instantly this prince must die:    For by his fall my honour must keep high.    Who attends us there?
Why, what is that to you?
Why look you so upon me?    I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,    But nothing alter'd:   what I was, I am;    More straining on for plucking back, not following    My leash unwillingly.
O, make them joyful. Grant their lawful suit.
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,which none must know but the king; and which heshall know within this hour, if I may come to thespeech of him.
If he be married.My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
Both of one horse?
Who is it?
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
O lamentable day!
Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.Approach, my Ariel, come.
You shall, my lord.
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an    open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is    necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite    also, to smell out work for the other senses.   I see    this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.    What an exchange had this been without boot! What    a boot is here with this exchange!   Sure the gods do    this year connive at us, and we may do any thing    extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of    iniquity, stealing away from his father with his    clog at his heels:   if I thought it were a piece of    honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not    do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;    and therein am I constant to my profession.
Now I know you better.When we with tears parted Pentapolis,The king my father gave you such a ring.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Ay, though it look like thee.
Come hither, Catesby. Rumor it abroad    That Anne my wife is very grievous sick.    I will take order for her keeping close.    Enquire me out some mean poor gentleman,    Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter.    The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.    Look how thou dreamst! I say again, give out    That Anne my queen is sick and like to die.    About it, for it stands me much upon    To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
Believe 't, I will.    By your furtherance I am clothed in steel;    And, spite of all the rapture of the sea,    This jewel holds his building on my arm:    Unto thy value I will mount myself    Upon a courser, whose delightful steps    Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread.    Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided    Of a pair of bases.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.This is my daughters jointure, for no moreCan I demand.
What have you now to present unto him?
I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we are prevented.
A space whose every cubit    Seems to cry out, How shall that Claribel    Measure us back to Naples?   Keep in Tunis,    And let Sebastian wake. Say this were death    That now hath seized them.   Why, they were no worse    Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples    As well as he that sleeps,   lords that can prate    As amply and unnecessarily    As this Gonzalo. I myself could make    A chough of as deep chat.   Oh, that you bore    The mind that I do, what a sleep were this    For your advancement! Do you understand me?
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's noseThat has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
You will not do't for all the world, I hope.    You are well favour'd, and your looks foreshow    You have a gentle heart.   I saw you lately,    When you caught hurt in parting two that fought:    Good sooth, it show'd well in you:   do so now:    Your lady seeks my life; come you between,    And save poor me, the weaker.
Are you drawn forth among a world of men    To slay the innocent? What is my offense?    Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?    What lawful quest have given their verdict up    Unto the frowning judge?   Or who pronounced    The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death    Before I be convict by course of law?    To threaten me with death is most unlawful.    I charge you, as you hope to have redemption,    By Christs dear blood shed for our grievous sins,    That you depart, and lay no hands on me.   The deed you undertake is damnable.
O thou dissembling cub! What wilt thou be    When time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case?    Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow    That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?    Farewell, and take her; but direct thy feet    Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.
Now blessed be the great Apollo!
O fool! fool! fool!
Alack, what troubleWas I then to you!
Hold, villain!
No, thou stand'st single, thou'rt not on him yet.
What, marry, may she?
It is even so.
My lord,
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors andfranklins say it, I'll swear it.
I like it well. Good Grumio, fetch it me.
How shall I understand you?
By mine honor, half-drunk. What is he at the gate, cousin?
A pretty peat! It is bestPut finger in the eye, an she knew why.
I thank thee, master.
I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,That I might love thee something.
She was, good Curtis, before this frost. But thou knowest winter tames man, woman and beast, for it hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and myself, fellow Curtis.
Hark, Perdita  [Drawing her aside]  I'll hear you by and by.
My brave spirit!Who was so firm, so constant, that this coilWould not infect his reason?
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmed with ale,This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
Why, so I do, the noblest that I have.    Oh, when mine eyes did see Olivia first,    Methought she purged the air of pestilence.    That instant was I turned into a hart,    And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,    E'er since pursue me.
They are; and Bolingbroke    Hath seized the wasteful king.   O, what pity is it    That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land    As we this garden!   We at time of year    Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,    Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,    With too much riches it confound itself:    Had he done so to great and growing men,    They might have lived to bear and he to taste    Their fruits of duty:   superfluous branches    We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:    Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,    Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
Out, strumpet! weepst thou for him to my face?
Behold, I have a weapon.    A better never did itself sustain    Upon a soldiers thigh.   I have seen the day    That with this little arm and this good sword    I have made my way through more impediments    Than twenty times your stop.   But, oh, vain boast!    Who can control his fate? tis not so now.    Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed.    Here is my journeys end, here is my butt,    And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.    Do you go back dismayed? tis a lost fear.    Man but a rush against Othellos breast,    And he retires. Where should Othello go?    Now, how dost thou look now?   O ill-starred wench,    Pale as thy smock! When we shall meet at compt    This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven    And fiends will snatch at it.   Cold, cold, my girl,    Even like thy chastity. O cursed, cursed slave!    Whip me, ye devils,    From the possession of this heavenly sight!    Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur,    Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!    Oh, Desdemona! Desdemona! dead! Oh! Oh!
I am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft    To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,    I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.    Under loves heavy burden do I sink.
Villain, I have done thy mother.
[to TRINCULO]  Here. Swear then how thou escapedst.
No, indeed, he is not.
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I prayLet us that are poor petitioners speak too.  Bacare,  you are marvelous forward.
I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how allthings go.
I fly, Biondello. But they may chance to need thee at home.Therefore leave us.
A spirit I am indeed,    But am in that dimension grossly clad    Which from the womb I did participate.    Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,  I should my tears let fall upon your cheekAnd say Thrice-welcome, drownèd Viola!
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?
After her, after her.
Bid me farewell.
I have it, Tranio!
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.
Run after that same peevish messenger,    The countys man. He left this ring behind him,    Would I or not. Tell him Ill none of it.    [OLIVIA hands him a ring]    Desire him not to flatter with his lord,    Nor hold him up with hopes.   I am not for him.    If that the youth will come this way tomorrow,    Ill give him reasons for t. Hie thee, Malvolio.
Well held out, i' faith.   No, I do not know you, nor I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her, nor your name is not Master Cesario, nor this is not my nose neither.  Nothing that is so is so.
Madam, Ill take my leave.
I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness:I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth,And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.
(sings) My lady is unkind, perdy.
Oh, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.
What, are you merry, knights?
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.    Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you.    And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest,    Your wife is like to reap a proper man.    There lies your way, due west.
Because methinks that she loved you as well    As you do love your lady Silvia:    She dreams of him that has forgot her love;    You dote on her that cares not for your love.    'Tis pity love should be so contrary;    And thinking of it makes me cry 'alas!'
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,    Whither away, or where is thy abode?    Happy the parents of so fair a child.    Happier the man whom favorable stars    Allot thee for his lovely bedfellow!
Well, let them rest.   Come hither, Catesby.    Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend    As closely to conceal what we impart.    Thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way.    What thinkest thou?   Is it not an easy matter    To make William Lord Hastings of our mind    For the installment of this noble duke    In the seat royal of this famous isle?
Mooncalf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good mooncalf.
It is my soul that calls upon my name.    How silver-sweet sound lovers tongues by night,    Like softest music to attending ears!
O Ratcliffe, I have dreamed a fearful dream! What thinkst thou, will our friends prove all true?
Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens?
Nay, sir, but hear me on.    All those which were his fellows but of late,    Some better than his value, on the moment    Follow his strides, his lobbies fill with tendance,    Rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear,    Make sacred even his stirrup, and through him    Drink the free air.
Madam, we'll tell tales.
I go.
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.
Why lament you, pretty one?
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
What is the matter? How now, general?
And so say I.
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.I am in your debt for your last exercise.Come the next sabbath, and I will content you.
Sirs, take up the corse.
Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us,    But Moyses and Valerius follow him.    Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;    There is our captain: we'll follow him that's fled;    The thicket is beset; he cannot 'scape.
My lord,They have all been touch'd and found base metal, forThey have all denied him.
Was that mine?
Ay, when my father was in Rome she did.
O, forget    What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.    The senators with one consent of love    Entreat thee back to Athens;   who have thought    On special dignities, which vacant lie    For thy best use and wearing.
Shall t be tonight at supper?
Hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er    Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter;    Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers    Diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers;    And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown    My bosky acres and my unshrubbed down,    Rich scarf to my proud earth. Why hath thy queen    Summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?
Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,And we will all subscribe to thy advice:Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning.I mean that with my soul I love thy daughterAnd do intend to make her Queen of England.
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will,I will deny thee nothing.
Do not draw the curtain.
Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?
March on, march on, since we are up in arms,If not to fight with foreign enemies,Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
Ill be thy second.
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much.    Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,    Having displeased my father, to Lawrences cell    To make confession and to be absolved.
My lord, tis but begun.
What news with thee, AEmilius?
Nay, if you strive
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Hes gone.
From the Count Orsino, is it?
No, as I am a man!
Fairly spoke.Sit then and talk with her. She is thine own.What, Ariel! My industrious servant, Ariel!
Ay, my good lord, and no one in the presenceBut his red color hath forsook his cheeks.
Why, then lets home again.  [To GRUMIO]  Come, sirrah, lets away.
Too familiarIs my dear son with such sour company.I bring thee tidings of the Princes doom.
O, wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
How shall she be endow'd,if she be mated with an equal husband?
Boult, take her away; use her at thy pleasure:crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her, That true hearts cannot bear it.
You knew of his departure, as you knowWhat you have underta'en to do in's absence.
[indicating CALIBAN]  This is a strange thing as e'er I looked on.
Ay me! I see the ruin of my house.    The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind.    Insulting tyranny begins to jut    Upon the innocent and aweless throne.    Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre.    I see, as in a map, the end of all.
[as CAMBIO]   Preposterous ass, that never read so far    To know the cause why music was ordained.    Was it not to refresh the mind of man    After his studies or his usual pain?    Then give me leave to read philosophy    And, while I pause, serve in your harmony.
I fear me both are false.
Pray, entertain them; give them guide to us.
I flatter not; but say thou art a caitiff.
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.
What with him? he comes notLike to his father's greatness: his approach,So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us'Tis not a visitation framed, but forcedBy need and accident. What train?
Go to, away.
For this reason, if youll know:That shes the choice love of Signior Gremio.
Who, without those means thou talkest of, didst thouever know beloved?
Neither.
I would they were, that I might die at once,    For now they kill me with a living death.    Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,    Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops.    These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear    No, when my father York and Edward wept    To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made    When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;    Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,    Told the sad story of my fathers death    And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,    That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks    Like trees bedashed with rainin that sad time,    My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;    And what these sorrows could not thence exhale    Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.    I never sued to friend, nor enemy;    My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word.    But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,    My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the pickingon's teeth.
Madam, we'll dance.
Heaven cease this idle humor in your Honor!    Oh, that a mighty man of such descent,    Of such possessions and so high esteem,    Should be infusèd with so foul a spirit!
Then say at once what is it thou requests.
How!
I do bite my thumb, sir.
Whither would you have me?
[Scatters flowers around JULIETS closed tomb]    Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew    O woe! Thy canopy is dust and stones    Which with sweet water nightly I will dew.    Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans,    The obsequies that I for thee will keep    Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Darst thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
What a caterwauling do you keep here!   If my lady have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.
We are so virtuously bound
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
That same villain, Romeo.
Your Highness told me I should post before.
So I shall mend mine own, by the lack of thine.
Oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!    It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night    Like a rich jewel in an Ethiopes ear,    Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear.    So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows    As yonder lady oer her fellows shows.    The measure done, Ill watch her place of stand,    And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand.    Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!    For I neer saw true beauty till this night.
I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.
When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers for the name of king? To cabin, silence! Trouble us not.
The empress' sons, I take them, Chiron and Demetrius.
How now, my lord!
What, now?
Earlier too, sir, if now I be one.
At Ely House.
(reads)      Thou comest to the lady Olivia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly.   But thou liest in thy throat. That is not the matter I challenge thee for.
Fie! Your sword upon a woman?
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed.Why, or for what, the nobles were committedIs all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
Fear not: the forest is not three leagues off;If we recover that, we are sure enough.
No, sir, I live by the church.
With all my heart.   This fellow I remember    Since once he played a farmers eldest son.    'Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well.    I have forgot your name, but sure that part    Was aptly fitted and naturally performed.
Are you not a strumpet?
So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar if a beggardwell near him,   or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor stand by the church.
By this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.
You, sir? Why, what are you?
Why, whose is it?
[as LUCENTIO]   Sir, I shall not be slack;   in sign whereof,    Please ye we may contrive this afternoon    And quaff carouses to our mistress' health    And do as adversaries do in law,    Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
Look, more!
I must catechise you for it, madonna. Good my mouse of virtue, answer me.
So would I,as good a trick as ever hangman served thief.
You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.
[To SECOND SERVINGMAN]  Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Here comes the lord.
I do not find that thou dealst justly with me.
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,And not till then.
At least two glasses. The time twixt six and nowMust by us both be spent most preciously.
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long. But Iwould be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.
Why, theres no remedy. 'Tis the curse of service.    Preferment goes by letter and affection,    And not by old gradation, where each second    Stood heir to th' first.   Now sir, be judge yourself,    Whether I in any just term am affined    To love the Moor.
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke.    Tell him myself, the mayor, and aldermen,    No less importing than our general good,    In deep designs, and matters of great moment    Are come to have some conference with his grace.
O, forgive me my sins!
Ha! Am I king? 'Tis sobut Edward lives.
Well, well, put up your sword.
By my troth, it is well said. For himself to mar, quoth he? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?
Singing    Where is the life that late I led    Where are those  Sit down, Kate, and welcome.Soud, soud, soud, soud!
He and myselfHave travail'd in the great shower of your gifts,And sweetly felt it.
What hast here? ballads?
Great ApolloTurn all to the best! These proclamations,So forcing faults upon Hermione,I little like.
Be wise, and get you home.
It hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.
What oclock tomorrowShall I send to thee?
Go, be gone.
What name, fair lady?
How many women would do such a message?    Alas, poor Proteus! Thou hast entertain'd    A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.    Alas, poor fool! Why do I pity him    That with his very heart despiseth me?    Because he loves her, he despiseth me;    Because I love him I must pity him.    This ring I gave him when he parted from me,    To bind him to remember my good will;    And now am I, unhappy messenger,    To plead for that which I would not obtain,    To carry that which I would have refused,    To praise his faith which I would have dispraised.    I am my master's true-confirmed love;    But cannot be true servant to my master,    Unless I prove false traitor to myself.    Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly    As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.
How blessed are we that are not simple men!Yet nature might have made me as these are,Therefore I will not disdain.
Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words    Can no way change you to a milder form,    I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end,    And love you 'gainst the nature of love,force ye.
[as LUCENTIO]   Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,    That being a stranger in this city here    Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,    Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.    Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,    In the preferment of the eldest sister.    This liberty is all that I request,    That, upon knowledge of my parentage,    I may have welcome mongst the rest that woo    And free access and favor as the rest.    And toward the education of your daughters,    I here bestow a simple instrument    And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.    [BIONDELLO  b    rings the gifts forward]    If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Sport royal, I warrant you.   I know my physic will work with him.   I will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where he shall find the letter. Observe his construction of it.   For this night, to bed, and dream onthe event. Farewell.
Will you swearNever to marry but by my free leave?
As full of valour as of royal blood:    Both have I spill'd;   O would the deed were good!    For now the devil, that told me I did well,    Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.    This dead king to the living king I'll bear    Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
One, Kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted with.Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
I know his soul is in heaven, fool.
O monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out    With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey;   and so twill do    With some men else that think themselves as safe    As thou and I, who, as thou knowst, are dear    To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
Do you love me?
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you:Please you to dispose yourselves.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:    Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,    As he is but my father's brother's son,    Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow,    Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood    Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize    The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:    He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:    Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.
Come, bring her away.
Ill tear her all to pieces!
When clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks;    When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;    When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?    Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.    All may be well; but if God sort it so,    'Tis more than we deserve or I expect.
Silver. There it goes, Silver!
Come, swear to that, kiss the book. I will furnish it anon with new contents, swear.
If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some    other hour, I should derive much from't;   for,    take't of my soul, my lord leans wondrously to    discontent: his comfortable temper has forsook him;    he's much out of health, and keeps his chamber.
I see them now; then was a blessed time.
I have a tree, which grows here in my close,    That mine own use invites me to cut down,    And shortly must I fell it:     tell my friends,    Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree    From high to low throughout,   that whoso please    To stop affliction, let him take his haste,    Come hither, ere my tree hath felt the axe,    And hang himself.   I pray you, do my greeting.
She returns this ring to you, sir. You might have savedme my pains to have taken it away yourself.   She adds, moreover, that you should put your lord into a desperateassurance she will none of him.   And one thing more, that you be never so hardy to come again in his affairs,unless it be to report your lords taking of this.     Receive it so.
Who, I, my lord?
Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.
Where shall we meet i' th' morning?
Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceived;    The one is Murder, Rape is the other's name;    And therefore bind them, gentle Publius.    Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.    Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,    And now I find it; therefore bind them sure,    And stop their mouths, if they begin to cry.
Come, come, dispatch. The duke would be at dinner. Make a short shrift. He longs to see your head.
The nobleman would have dealt with her like anobleman, and she sent him away as cold as asnowball; saying his prayers too.
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
I am quit.Moe things like men! Eat, Timon, and abhor them.
I will follow you.
Why, madam, have I offered love for this,To be so flouted in this royal presence? Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?
And I, to keep all this.
How lush and lusty the grass looks! How green!
Look where he comes.
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and    in the view of the shepherd: so that all the    instruments which aided to expose the child were    even then lost when it was found.   But O, the noble    combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in    Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of    her husband, another elevated that the oracle was    fulfilled:   she lifted the princess from the earth,    and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin    her to her heart that she might no more be in danger    of losing.
[aside to PROSPERO]  Sir, all this serviceHave I done since I went.
I know you not.
I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
And be a happy mother by the deed.
See him delivered, Fabian; bring him hither.
I am like you, they say.
[to RATCLIFFE]  God bless the prince from all the pack of you! A knot you are of damnèd bloodsuckers.
O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!
What is she?
A good swift simile, but something currish.
So, so, so, so! They laugh that win!
Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow. Let me be clear of thee.
A man that all his timeHath founded his good fortunes on your love,Shared dangers with you
Not I, for this fair island.I do love Cassio well, and would do muchTo cure him of this evil
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
As hell, Sir Topas.
Had all his hairs been livesMy great revenge had stomach for them all.
By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight    Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard    Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers    Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond.    'Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me;    Under our tents Ill play the eavesdropper    To see if any mean to shrink from me.
But while I say one prayer!
Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;    Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.    Now mark me, how I will undo myself;    I give this heavy weight from off my head    And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,    The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;    With mine own tears I wash away my balm,    With mine own hands I give away my crown,    With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,    With mine own breath release all duty's rites:    All pomp and majesty I do forswear;    My manors, rents, revenues I forego;    My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:    God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!    God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!    Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,    And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!    Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,    And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!    God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says,    And send him many years of sunshine days!    What more remains?
What is it, Timon?
Now, the melancholy god protect thee, and the tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal.   I would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business might be everything and their intent everywhere, for thats it that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
For this care of Tamora,Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.
Would Katherine had never seen him, though!
Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.    Join with the Goths; and with revengeful war    Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,    And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.
God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better increasing your folly!   Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence thatyou are no fool.
[to STEPHANO]  Ill kiss thy foot. Ill swear myself thysubject.
Is't not your business too?
[reads]    Imprimis,  a loose-bodied gown
She that was ever fair and never proud,    Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,    Never lacked gold and yet went never gay,    Fled from her wish and yet said Now I may,    She that being angered, her revenge being nigh,    Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly,    She that in wisdom never was so frail    To change the cods head for the salmons tail,    She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind,    See suitors following and not look behind,    She was a wight, if ever such wights were
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
At Friar Patrick's cell,Where I intend holy confession.
Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds!    Have mercy, Jesu!Soft, I did but dream.    O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!    The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight.    Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.    What do I fear? Myself? Theres none else by.    Richard loves Richard; that is, I and I.    Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am.    Then fly! What, from myself? Great reason why:    Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?    Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good    That I myself have done unto myself?    O, no! Alas, I rather hate myself    For hateful deeds committed by myself.    I am a villain. Yet I lie. I am not.    Fool, of thyself speak well.   Fool, do not flatter.    My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,    And every tongue brings in a several tale,    And every tale condemns me for a villain.    Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree;    Murder, stern murder, in the direst degree;    All several sins, all used in each degree,    Throng to the bar, crying all, Guilty! guilty!    I shall despair. There is no creature loves me,    And if I die no soul will pity me.    And wherefore should they, since that I myself    Find in myself no pity to myself?    Methought the souls of all that I had murdered    Came to my tent, and every one did threat    Tomorrows vengeance on the head of Richard.
To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.
What wouldst do then, Apemantus?
Aybut not yet to die!
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
I am a messenger.
This savors not much of distraction.
Why, Jack, boy! Ho, boy! and as much news as wilt thou.
Lucentio is your name. Of whence, I pray?
Enough.
Here 'tis; this is it.
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banishèd.Romeo that killed himhe is banishèd.
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for. Take up my mistress' gown to his masters use! O, fie, fie, fie!
I doubt it not, sir, but you will curse your wooing.    [To  BAPTISTA  ]   Neighbor, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it.   To express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young scholar   [presenting   LUCENTIO  , disguised as  CAMBIO  ]   that hath been long studying at Rheims, as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages as the other in music and mathematics.    His name is Cambio. Pray accept his service.
Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his tides    well. Those healths will make thee and thy state    look ill, Timon.   Here's that which is too weak to    be a sinner, honest water, which ne'er left man i' the mire:    This and my food are equals; there's no odds:    Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.  [Apemantus' Grace]  Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;    I pray for no man but myself:    Grant I may never prove so fond,    To trust man on his oath or bond;    Or a harlot, for her weeping;    Or a dog, that seems a-sleeping:    Or a keeper with my freedom;    Or my friends, if I should need 'em.    Amen. So fall to't:    Rich men sin, and I eat root.
The sound is going away. Lets follow it, and after do our work.
What is your name?
What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murder! Murder!
What say you, uncle?
For he fears none.
What is his name?
The better that your Lordship please to ask.
I thought you had been willing to resign.
My daughter! Oh, my daughter!
[t    o  SEBASTIAN   ]    Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,    Now go with me and with this holy man    Into the chantry by.   There, before him    And underneath that consecrated roof,    Plight me the full assurance of your faith,    That my most jealous and too doubtful soul    May live at peace.   He shall conceal it    Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,    What time we will our celebration keep    According to my birth. What do you say?
[aside]  Ah, little joy enjoys the queen thereof,For I am she, and altogether joyless.I can no longer hold me patient.
Cross-gartered?
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
She that is Queen of Tunis; she that dwells    Ten leagues beyond mans life; she that from Naples    Can have no note, unless the sun were post    The man i' th' moons too slow   till newborn chins    Be rough and razorable; she that from whom    We all were sea-swallowed,   though some cast again,    And by that destiny to perform an act    Whereof whats past is prologue, what to come    In yours and my discharge.
I beseech you, do.
There's some ill planet reigns:    I must be patient till the heavens look    With an aspect more favourable.   Good my lords,    I am not prone to weeping, as our sex    Commonly are; the want of which vain dew    Perchance shall dry your pities:   but I have    That honourable grief lodged here which burns    Worse than tears drown:   beseech you all, my lords,    With thoughts so qualified as your charities    Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so    The king's will be perform'd!
It is his highness' pleasure that the queenAppear in person here in court. Silence!
Sirrah, lead these gentlemenTo my daughters, and tell them bothThese are their tutors. Bid them use them well.
Filth, thou liest!
Where did I leave?
Well, but whats o'clock?
I, that I wasNo prodigal.
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed;And he that's once denied will hardly speed.
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory.To feed my humor, wish thyself no harm.
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
Done. The wager?
My lord, my answer isto Lancaster;    And I am come to seek that name in England;    And I must find that title in your tongue,    Before I make reply to aught you say.
(  from within   )  Who calls there?
What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.
Who is t that calls? Is it my lady mother?Is she not down so late or up so early?What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
I have no hopeThat hes undrowned.
His garments are rich, but he wearsthem not handsomely.
A contagious breath.
'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a mans a-hungry,   to challenge him the field and then to break promise with him and make a fool of him.
'Tis most certain.
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!
Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest    As yet I do not.   But, as I can learn,    He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,    And from the crossrow plucks the letter "G",    And says a wizard told him that by G    His issue disinherited should be.    And for my name of George begins with "G",    It follows in his thought that I am he.    These, as I learn, and such like toys as these    Have moved his Highness to commit me now.
That 'once' I see by your good father's speedWill come on very slowly. I am sorry,Most sorry, you have broken from his likingWhere you were tied in duty, and as sorryYour choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,That you might well enjoy her.
I had forgot that foul conspiracy    Of the beast Caliban and his confederates    Against my life.   The minute of their plot    Is almost come.   Well done. Avoid, no more!
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;    His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.    So much for that.   Now for our Irish wars:    We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,    Which live like venom where no venom else    But only they have privilege to live.    And for these great affairs do ask some charge,    Towards our assistance we do seize to us    The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,    Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.
[to RATCLIFFE]  You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me;    Let's purge this choler without letting blood:    This we prescribe, though no physician;    Deep malice makes too deep incision;    Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed;    Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.    Good uncle, let this end where it begun;    We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.
Sir, I will use    My utmost skill in his recovery,   provided    That none but I and my companion maid    Be suffer'd to come near him.
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.  [to YORK]  But come, my lord. With a heavy heart,Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
I hope, sir, you are, and I am yours.
Be confident to speak, Northumberland:    We three are but thyself;   and, speaking so,    Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.
Well, my lord,    If you may please to think I love the king    And through him what is nearest to him, which is    Your gracious self, embrace but my direction:    If your more ponderous and settled project    May suffer alteration, on mine honour,    I'll point you where you shall have such receiving    As shall become your highness;   where you may    Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,    There's no disjunction to be made, but by    As heavens forefend!your ruin; marry her,    And, with my best endeavours in your absence,    Your discontenting father strive to qualify    And bring him up to liking.
Let all my land be sold.
I long with all my heart to see the prince. I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
He hath, my lord, but be you well assuredNo more than hell unswear.
The loss of such a lord includes all harms.
This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Please your highness, postsFrom those you sent to the oracle are comeAn hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,Hasting to the court.
Where lies he?
[Aside]   One of Lord Timon's men? a gift, I    warrant. Why, this hits right; I dreamt of a silver    basin and ewer to-night.   Flaminius, honest    Flaminius; you are very respectively welcome, sir.    Fill me some wine.
[within]  A sail, a sail!
I am; therefore come down, and welcome me.
[within]  What is t oclock?
Who of my people hold him in delay?
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain.
I say, silver sound because musicians sound for silver.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lipsAs of her tongue she oft bestows on me, You would have have enough.
No, sir. I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I bitemy thumb, sir.
[as LUCENTIO]  I thank you, sir. Where then do you know bestWe be affied and such assurance ta'enAs shall with either parts agreement stand?
Oh, out of that no hope    What great hope have you!   No hope that way is    Another way so high a hope that even    Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,    But doubt discovery there.   Will you grant with me    That Ferdinand is drowned?
The dropsy drown this fool! What do you mean    To dote thus on such luggage? Lets alone,    And do the murder first.   If he awake,    From toe to crown hell fill our skins with pinches,    Make us strange stuff.
Ho, gentlemen! my lord calls.
Bid them come near.
All lost! To prayers, to prayers, all lost!
Why, how now, father!Speak ere thou diest.
[sings]    I am gone, sir,    And anon, sir,    Ill be with you again,    In a trice,    Like to the old Vice,    Your need to sustain,    Who, with dagger of lath    In his rage and his wrath,    Cries Aha, to the devil,    Like a mad lad,    Pare thy nails, dad,    Adieu, goodman devil.
[aside to ARIEL]  My tricksy spirit!
What wilt thou do?
Such as she says my lord did say I was.
Why, therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold.    Wheres the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the servingmen in their new fustian, their white stockings, and every officer his wedding garment on?   Be the Jacks fair within, the Jills fair without, the carpets laid, and everything in order?
I marry her! What? A customer? Prithee bear some charity to my wit. Do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!
What is her mother?
We have here one, sir, if she wouldbut there nevercame her like in Mytilene.
My most honourable lord, I am e'en sick of shame,that, when your lordship this other day sent to me,I was so unfortunate a beggar.
That's well spoke.
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
May see the sea hath cast upon your coast.
[Aside]   What I do next, shall be to tell the king    Of this escape and whither they are bound;    Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail    To force him after: in whose company    I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight    I have a woman's longing.
We were not born to sue, but to command;    Which since we cannot do to make you friends,    Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,    At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day:    There shall your swords and lances arbitrate    The swelling difference of your settled hate:    Since we can not atone you, we shall see    Justice design the victor's chivalry.    Lord marshal, command our officers at arms    Be ready to direct these home alarms.
Good Boatswain, have care. Wheres the Master?Play the men.
A thousand times good night!
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.
Well said, well said; the fire and cloths.    The rough and woeful music that we have,    Cause it to sound, beseech you.    The viol once more: how thou stirr'st, thou block!    The music there!   I pray you, give her air.    Gentlemen.    This queen will live: nature awakes; a warmth    Breathes out of her:   she hath not been entranced    Above five hours: see how she gins to blow    Into life's flower again!
What think you of this fool, Malvolio? Doth he not mend?
Now God in heaven forbid!
Lie
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,    I have no joy of this contract tonight.    It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,    Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be    Ere one can say It lightens.   Sweet, good night.    This bud of love, by summers ripening breath,    May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.    Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest    Come to thy heart as that within my breast.
[aside]  A proper stripling, and an amorous.
Do so. To ebbHereditary sloth instructs me.
Thou dost me yet but little hurt. Thou wilt anon, I know it by thy trembling. Now Prosper works upon thee.
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,    Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,    Keep in your bosom:   yet remain assured    That he's a made-up villain.
If these be true spies which I wear in my head, heres a goodly sight.
Ay, that's well known:    But what particular rarity?   what strange,    Which manifold record not matches? See,    Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power    Hath conjured to attend.   I know the merchant.
[Aside]  How well this honest mirth becomes their labour!
To vex thee.
The whole butt, man. My cellar is in a rock by th' seaside where my wine is hid.How now, mooncalf? How does thine ague?
Did you go to 't so young? Were you a gamester atfive or at seven?
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not sayhe lies?
Ill look to like if looking liking move. But no more deep will I endart mine eyeThan your consent gives strength to make it fly.
If you do love my brother, hate not me.    I am his brother, and I love him well.    If you are hired for meed, go back again,    And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,    Who shall reward you better for my life    Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
I cannot chooseBut pity her.
I hear the news, my lord.
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,That e'er the sun shone bright on.
Oh! My fear interprets. What, is he dead?
Mistress, your father prays you leave your booksAnd help to dress your sisters chamber up.You know tomorrow is the wedding day.
I have no more sons of the royal blood    For thee to slaughter.   For my daughters, Richard,    They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens,    And therefore level not to hit their lives.
How's this? We must take another course with you.    If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a    breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope,    shall undo a whole household,   let me be gelded like    a spaniel. Come your ways.
Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thylabour: he that loves to be flattered is worthy o'the flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to agreat matter.
These walls of ours    Were not erected by their hands from whom    You have received your griefs;   nor are they such    That these great towers, trophies and schools    should fall    For private faults in them.
Patience, good sir,Or here I'll cease.
And Julia herself did give it me;And Julia herself hath brought it hither.
She says you have some goodly jest in hand.She will not come. She bids you come to her.
Here is no use for gold.
I promise you I scarcely know myself.Hear you the news abroad?
I will be hanged, if some eternal villain,    Some busy and insinuating rogue,    Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,    Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else!
What, Curio?
'Tis so, my lord.
Nay, good my lord,
Hanged! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck toa fair end.
Not I.
Fie! What a foolish duty call you this?
Come on, come on. You are pictures out of door,    Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens,    Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,    Players in your housewifery, and hussies in your beds.
Mistake me not. I speak but as I find.Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
Fie, thou'rt a churl; ye've got a humour there    Does not become a man: 'tis much to blame.    They say, my lords, 'ira furor brevis est;' but yond    man is ever angry.   Go, let him have a table by    himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is    he fit for't, indeed.
Right welcome, sir!Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous timeIn different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.
A good wench, give it me.
A fool of thee: depart.
Well, do it, and be brief. I will walk by.    I would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit.    No, heavens forfend, I would not kill thy soul!
Oh, thou art deceived. I would have made it short, forI was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
[giving money to th    e  FOOL   ]  Come on. There is sixpence for you. Lets have a song.
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
Go shake your ears!
A blessèd labor, my most sovereign lord.    Amongst this princely heap, if any here    By false intelligence, or wrong surmise    Hold me a foe,    If I unwittingly, or in my rage,    Have aught committed that is hardly borne    By any in this presence,   I desire    To reconcile me to his friendly peace.    'Tis death to me to be at enmity;    I hate it, and desire all good mens love.    First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,    Which I will purchase with my duteous service;    Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,    If ever any grudge were lodged between us;    Of you, Lord Rivers, and Lord Gray of you,    Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed of all!    I do not know that Englishman alive    With whom my soul is any jot at odds    More than the infant that is born tonight.    I thank my God for my humility.
I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,    To leave this keen encounter of our wits    And fall something into a slower method    Is not the causer of the timeless deaths    Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,    As blameful as the executioner?
And mine, my lord.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.  [to DORSET]  Take all the swift advantage of the hours.You shall have letters from me to my son In your behalf, to meet you on the way.Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
Well call thee at the cubiculo. Go.
You're liars all.
Let me but meet you ladies one hour hence,    And Ill salute your Grace of York as mother    And reverend looker-on, of two fair queens.     [to ANNE]     Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,    There to be crownèd Richards royal queen.
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Madam, I pity much your grievances;    Which since I know they virtuously are placed,    I give consent to go along with you,    Recking as little what betideth me    As much I wish all good befortune you.    When will you go?
I know t, I thank you. You do love my lord.    You have known him long, and be you well assured    He shall in strangeness stand no farther off    Than in a polite distance.
What, sovereign sir,    I did not well I meant well. All my services    You have paid home:   but that you have vouchsafed,    With your crown'd brother and these your contracted    Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,    It is a surplus of your grace, which never    My life may last to answer.
[aside]  Poor worm, thou art infected!This visitation shows it.
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acreof barren ground: long heath, brown furze, anything. The wills above be done, but I would fain die a dry death.
O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear.Go you to him from me.
Believe me, noble lord,    I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:    These high wild hills and rough uneven ways    Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,    And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,    Making the hard way sweet and delectable.    But I bethink me what a weary way    From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found    In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,    Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled    The tediousness and process of my travel:    But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have    The present benefit which I possess;    And hope to joy is little less in joy    Than hope enjoy'd:   by this the weary lords    Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done    By sight of what I have, your noble company.
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
Fetch him off, I pray you. He speaks nothing but madman.Fie on him!
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,He comes to bad intent.
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is    But for his own;     and for the right of that    We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;    And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!
Both, both, my girl.    By foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence,    But blessedly holp hither.
Good gods!
Notable pirate! Thou saltwater thief,    What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,    Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear,    Hast made thine enemies?
An I do not
Go on, go onThou canst not speak too much; I have deservedAll tongues to talk their bitterest.
I pray you, let it stand.
Thou hast faced many things.
Every day thou daffst me with some device, Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keepst from me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope.   I will indeed no longer endure it, nor am I yetpersuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.
Plague on t, an I thought he had been valiant and so cunning in fence, Id have seen him damned ere Id have challenged him.   Let him let the matter slip, and Ill give him my horse, gray Capilet.
Marry, but you shall have, and heres my hand.  [he offers her his hand]
Whither art going?
Whats that to the purpose?
This is a brave fellow.
[giving him money]    For saying so, theres gold.    Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,    Whereto thy speech serves for authority,    The like of him.   Knowst thou this country?
Oh, did he so? I charge you, go with me.
Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.
I am sorry to find you thus. I have been to seek you.
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!    This dagger hath mistaen   for, lo, his house    Is empty on the back of Montague,    And it mis-sheathèd in my daughters bosom.
Go to, farewell. Put money enough in your purse.
Stand farther.Come, proceed.
Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?
Good madonna, why mournest thou?
Two, twoa shirt and a smock.
Whos there? Othello?
Alas, why would you heap this care on me?    I am unfit for state and majesty.    I do beseech you, take it not amiss;    I cannot, nor I will not, yield to you.
Commend me to my loving countrymen,
I am for you.  [He draws his sword]
If it please the gods to defend you by men, then menmust comfort you, men must feed you, men must stiryou up. Boult's returned.
Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear.
To anger him, well have the bear again, and we will fool him black and blue. Shall we not, Sir Andrew?
Devil!  [strikes her]
'Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone;    And what remains will hardly stop the mouth    Of present dues:   the future comes apace:    What shall defend the interim? and at length    How goes our reckoning?
Foul weather?
I do believe it.
Your steward puts me off, my lord;And I am sent expressly to your lordship.
We are, my lord, and come to have the warrantThat we may be admitted where he is.
What we can do, we'll do, to do you service.
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
Beseech you, father.
Peter, stay at the gate.
At thy good hearts oppression.
When I was born, the wind was north.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist;If wars, we are unable to resist.
Then go successantly, and plead to him.
How long a time lies in one little word!    Four lagging winters and four wanton springs    End in a word:   such is the breath of kings.
I am glad hes come, howsoe'er he comes.
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.     [shows his arm]     Look how I am bewitched! Behold mine arm    Is like a blasted sapling withered up;    And this is Edwards wife, that monstrous witch,    Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore,    That by their witchcraft thus have markèd me.
You do him injury to scorn his corse.
Hes had most favorable and happy speed.    Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,    The guttered rocks and congregated sands,    Traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel,    As having sense of beauty, do omit    Their mortal natures, letting go safely by    The divine Desdemona.
This is the fruits of rashness. Marked you not    How that the guilty kindred of the queen    Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?    O, they did urge it still unto the king.    God will revenge it.   Come, lords, will you go    To comfort Edward with our company?
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain'd face,The last true duties of thy noble son!
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out    In sharing that which you have pilled from me!    Which of you trembles not that looks on me?    If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects,    Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.    Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.
Just the contrary. The better for thy friends.
Shall I bring thee on the way?
I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
Had I a glass, I would.
Well, thou dost best.
What, like a corse?
No, sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.
Of the kings ship,The mariners, say how thou hast disposed,And all the rest o' th' fleet.
And by despairing shalt thou stand excusedFor doing worthy vengeance on thyselfThat didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
So the were bleeding-new, my lord, there's no meatlike 'em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.
Maybe the letter moved him,For, as I think, they do command him home,Deputing Cassio in his government.
Marry, hang her up for ever!
No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly. She willkeep no fool, sir, till she be married,   and fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to herrings; the husbands the bigger:   I am indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.
Four legs and two voicesa most delicate monster.His forward voice now is to speak well of his friend. His backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract.    If all the wine in my bottle will recover him, I will help his ague. Come.    [CALIBAN drinks]    Amen! I will pour some in thy other mouth.
I know she is an irksome brawling scold.If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.
Nor I, nor any    But one that's here, and that's himself,   for he    The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,    His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,    Whose sting is sharper than the sword's;    and will not    For, as the case now stands, it is a curse    He cannot be compell'd to'tonce remove    The root of his opinion, which is rotten    As ever oak or stone was sound.
Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service    Did worthily perform, and I must use you    In such another trick.   Go bring the rabble,    O'er whom I give thee power, here to this place.    Incite them to quick motion, for I must    Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple    Some vanity of mine art. It is my promise,    And they expect it from me.
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!
No.I will resist such entertainment tillMine enemy has more power.
It is my wretched fortune.
What of you?
How high a pitch his resolution soars!Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?
Most mighty sovereign,You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.I never was nor never will be false.
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.
Hard fate! he might have died in war.    My lords, if not for any parts in him    Though his right arm might purchase his own time    And be in debt to none   yet, more to move you,    Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both:    And, for I know your reverend ages love    Security, I'll pawn my victories, all    My honours to you, upon his good returns.    If by this crime he owes the law his life,    Why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore    For law is strict, and war is nothing more.
(sings) Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.
Ill have no bigger. This doth fit the time, And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you    Against the general enemy Ottoman     [to BRABANTIO]    I did not see you. Welcome, gentle signior.    We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.
Thy father! O villain! He is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
He shall be endured.    What, goodman boy! I say, he shall. Go to.    Am I the master here, or you? Go to.    Youll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,    Youll make a mutiny among my guests.    You will set cock-a-hoop. Youll be the man!
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord. Thou hast a lady far more beautifulThan any woman in this waning age.
I am a foolTo weep at what I am glad of.
Art thou his father?
Prithee, read i' thy right wits.
When good manners shall lie all in one or two mens hands, and they unwashed too, tis a foul thing.
'Tis not well mended so, it is but botch'd;if not, I would it were.
Up with my tent!Here will I lie tonight.But where tomorrow? Well, alls one for that.Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
Sit, sir, I will recount it to you:But, see, I am prevented.
The voice of dead Thaisa!
Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.
Tell him, when that our princely father York    Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm,    And charged us from his soul to love each other,    He little thought of this divided friendship.    Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,    Wanting the manage of unruly jades.    In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,    To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.    In the base court? Come down? Down, court!    down, king!    For night-owls shriek where mounting larks    should sing.
I will not.
Oh, my heart bleedsTo think o' th' teen that I have turned you to,Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carriedhence the child?
In love?
These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' th' alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for herThats foul and foolish?
[aside to  LUCENTIO  ]  Husht, master, heres some good pastime toward.That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
Thou hast a servant named Lucilius.
What did thy song bode, lady?    Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan.    And die in music.    (  singing)       Willow, willow, willow        Moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel Moor.    So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true.    So speaking as I think, alas, I die.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
On, good Camillo.
How!Do as I bid you, or you'll move me else.
She never yet was foolish that was fair,For even her folly helped her to an heir.
Warrant thee, my mans as true as steel.
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him:   it    is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the    subject, makes old hearts fresh:   they that went on    crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to    see him a man.
Nay, yet be wise, yet we see nothing done,    She may be honest yet.   Tell me but this,    Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief    Spotted with strawberries in your wifes hand?
No doubt, no doubt. O, tis a parlous boy,Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable. He is all the mothers, from the top to toe.
He; I know him.
We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,    As well appeareth by the cause you come;    Namely to appeal each other of high treason.    Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object    Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
What is your will?
Amen to that, sweet powers!    I cannot speak enough of this content.    It stops me here, it is too much of joy.    And this, and this, the greatest discords be    (kissing her)     That e'er our hearts shall make!
The taming school? What, is there such a place?
[aside]    It works!     [to FERDINAND]    Come on.     [aside]    Thou hast done well, fine Ariel!     [to FERDINAND]    Follow me.     [to ARIEL]    Hark what thou else shalt do me.
Dost thou think so, spirit?
He hath not money for these Irish wars,    His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,    But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.
By my white beard,    You offer him, if this be so, a wrong    Something unfilial:   reason my son    Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason    The father, all whose joy is nothing else    But fair posterity, should hold some counsel    In such a business.
(  aside  ) Heres an overweening rogue!
It requires swift foot.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers sake.
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic! What is this?    Proud, and I thank you, and I thank you not,    And yet not proud?   Mistress minion you,    Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,    But fettle your fine joints gainst Thursday next    To go with Paris to Saint Peters Church,    Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.    Out, you green sickness, carrion! Out, you baggage!    You tallow face!
Avaunt! Be gone! Thou hast set me on the rack.I swear tis better to be much abusedThan but to know t a little.
Sir, most heedfully.
I go, sir.
Upon my life, my lord, Ill undertake it.And so God give you quiet rest tonight!
If in Naples    I should report this now, would they believe me?    If I should say, I saw such islanders    For, certes, these are people of the island    Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note,    Their manners are more gentle-kind than of    Our human generation you shall find    Manynay, almost any.
All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazementInhabits here. Some heavenly power guide usOut of this fearful country!
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy    Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more    To blazon it,   then sweeten with thy breath    This neighbor air, and let rich musics tongue    Unfold the imagined happiness that both    Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Advise you what you say. The minister is here.   [in the voice   of Sir Topas]   Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore! Endeavor thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble-babble.
True. Save means to live.
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.
How? The best?What wert thou if the King of Naples heard thee?
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
'Tis well. And I have met a gentleman    Hath promised me to help me to another,    A fine musician to instruct our mistress.    So shall I no whit be behind in duty    To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert.    Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current.    O, that your young nobility could judge    What twere to lose it and be miserable!    They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,    And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
If they have done this deed, my noble lord
Humh!
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives,that I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight.   Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Or to be naked with her friend in bedAn hour or more, not meaning any harm?
[dispersedly, within]  Bow-wow.
Make your best haste, and go notToo far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather;Besides, this place is famous for the creaturesOf prey that keep upon't.
Hold, ho! Lieutenantsir, Montanogentlemen,    Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?    Hold! The general speaks to you. Hold, for shame!
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,    Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,    Which is not yet performed me.
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
O Kate, content thee. Prithee, be not angry.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after-supper,    When thou shalt tell the process of their death.    Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,    And be inheritor of thy desire.    Farewell till then.
Labouring for nine.
That face of his I do remember well.    Yet, when I saw it last, it was besmeared    As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war.    A baubling vessel was he captain of,    For shallow draught and bulk unprizable,      With which such scathful grapple did he make    With the most noble bottom of our fleet,    That very envy and the tongue of loss    Cried fame and honor on him.   Whats the matter?
The noblest mind he carriesThat ever govern'd man.
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: butI could afflict you farther.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,    Diana's temple is not distant far,    Where you may abide till your date expire.    Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine    Shall there attend you.
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husbandDid it to help thee to a better husband.
If you affect him, sister, here I swear Ill plead for you myself, but you shall have him.
Is he not jealous?
What is the matter here?
[as LITIO]  Youll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
My lord, she's not paced yet: you must take somepains to work her to your manage. Come, we willleave his honour and her together. Go thy ways.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,I may not suffer you to visit them.The king hath strictly charged the contrary.
That shes the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
All this we swear.
His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whippedout of the court: they cherish it to make it staythere; and yet it will no more but abide.
No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.
Ill know thy thoughts.
Wherefore, gentle maiden,Do you neglect them?
He sent to me, sir,Here he comes.
You may take my word, my lord; I know, no man    Can justly praise but what he does affect:    I weigh my friend's affection with mine own;    I'll tell you true. I'll call to you.
Thou hast sworn my love to be.
O, here's Servilius; now we shall know some answer.
Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
No pains, sir. I take pleasure in singing, sir.
What, hath the firmament more suns than one?
Lives, sir.
[as LUCENTIO]  And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
Who saw Cesario, ho?
[within]   What, ho, what, ho, what, ho!
And I in all unwillingness will go.    O, would to God that the inclusive verge    Of golden metal that must round my brow    Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains!    Anointed let me be with deadly venom,    And die ere men can say, God save the Queen.
Who taught you this?
Well, come again tomorrow. Fare thee well.A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
A halter pardon him and hell gnaw his bones!    Why should he call her whore? Who keeps her company?    What place? What time? What form? What likelihood?    The Moors abused by some most villainous knave,    Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.    O heavens, that such companions thoudst unfold,    And put in every honest hand a whip    To lash the rascals naked through the world    Even from the east to th' west!
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.
Then would to Heaven that I had never seen t!
O sir, I do, and will repute you ever The patron of my life and liberty.
I go. Write to me very shortly,And you shall understand from me her mind.
Live, noble Helicane!
[within]  O good my lord, I would speak a word with you!
But, sir, here comes your boy.'Twere good he were schooled.
A slave, that still an end turns me to shame!    Sebastian, I have entertained thee,    Partly that I have need of such a youth    That can with some discretion do my business,    For 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout,    But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior,    Which, if my augury deceive me not,    Witness good bringing up, fortune and truth:    Therefore know thou, for this I entertain thee.    Go presently and take this ring with thee,    Deliver it to Madam Silvia:    She loved me well deliver'd it to me.
But say, my lord, it were not registered,    Methinks the truth should live from age to age,    As twere retailed to all posterity,    Even to the general all-ending day.
I assure you, Carthage.
Go, Nurse. Go with her. Well to church tomorrow.
What says she to my birth?
I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me I am a drunkard. Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all.   To be now a sensible man, byand by a fool, and presently a beast! Oh, strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.
What a coil's here!    Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!    I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums    That are given for 'em.   Friendship's full of dregs:    Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs,    Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.
Thou liest. Thou canst not.
I hear him near.Nurse! Wife! What ho, what, Nurse, I say!
What time o' day is't, Apemantus?
Dull thing, I say so. He, that Caliban    Whom now I keep in service. Thou best knowst    What torment I did find thee in.   Thy groans    Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts    Of ever angry bears.   It was a torment    To lay upon the damned, which Sycorax    Could not again undo.   It was mine art,    When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape    The pine and let thee out.
At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any reason.    Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.     [sings]    Flout 'em and scout 'em,    And scout 'em and flout 'em.    Thought is free.
Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd    To bear the tidings of calamity.    Like an unseasonable stormy day,    Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,    As if the world were all dissolved to tears,    So high above his limits swells the rage    Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land    With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.    White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps    Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices,    Strive to speak big and clap their female joints    In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:    The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows    Of double-fatal yew against thy state;    Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills    Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,    And all goes worse than I have power to tell.
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,    Who prays continually for Richmonds good.    So much for that. The silent hours steal on,    And flaky darkness breaks within the east.    In brief, for so the season bids us be,    Prepare thy battle early in the morning,    And put thy fortune to the arbitrament    Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.    I, as I maythat which I would I cannot,    With best advantage will deceive the time,    And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms.    But on thy side I may not be too forward,    Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,    Be executed in his fathers sight.    Farewell. The leisure and the fearful time    Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love    And ample interchange of sweet discourse,    Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon.    God give us leisure for these rites of love!    Once more, adieu. Be valiant, and speed well.
Where should he have this gold? It is some poor    fragment, some slender sort of his remainder:   the    mere want of gold, and the falling-from of his    friends, drove him into this melancholy.
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:God knows I had as lief be none as one.
A delicate odour.
Romeo!
Signior, is all your family within?
Hold thy desperate hand.    Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.    Thy tears are womanish. Thy wild acts denote    The unreasonable fury of a beast.    Unseemly woman in a seeming man,    And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!    Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,    I thought thy disposition better tempered.    Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself,    And slay thy lady that in thy life lives    By doing damnèd hate upon thyself?    Why railst thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?    Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet    In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?    Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,    Which, like a usurer, aboundst in all    And usest none in that true use indeed    Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.    Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,    Digressing from the valor of a man;    Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,    Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;    Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,    Misshapen in the conduct of them both,    Like powder in a skill-less soldiers flask,    Is set afire by thine own ignorance;    And thou dismembered with thine own defence.    What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,    For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead    There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,    But thou slewst Tybaltthere art thou happy.    The law that threatened death becomes thy friend    And turns it to exilethere art thou happy.    A pack of blessings light upon thy back,    Happiness courts thee in her best array,    But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,    Thou poutst upon thy fortune and thy love.    Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.    Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.    Ascend her chamber, hence, and comfort her.    But look thou stay not till the watch be set,    For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,    Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time    To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,    Beg pardon of the Prince,   and call thee back    With twenty hundred thousand times more joy    Than thou wentst forth in lamentation.    Go before, Nurse.   Commend me to thy lady,    And bid her hasten all the house to bed,    Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.    Romeo is coming.
None, man. All idle. Whores and knaves.
Leave you! Wherefore?
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.
Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.
He's but a mad lord, and nought but humour sways him.He gave me a jewel th' other day, and now he hasbeat it out of my hat: did you see my jewel?
O musicians, because my heart itself plays My Heart isFull. O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
La you now, you hear:When she will take the rein I let her run;But she'll not stumble.
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
He cannot live, I hope, and must not die    Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven.    Ill in to urge his hatred more to Clarence    With lies well steeled with weighty arguments,    And, if I fail not in my deep intent,    Clarence hath not another day to live;    Which done, God take King Edward to His mercy,    And leave the world for me to bustle in.    For then Ill marry Warwicks youngest daughter.    What though I killed her husband and her father?    The readiest way to make the wench amends    Is to become her husband and her father;    The which will I, not all so much for love    As for another secret close intent    By marrying her which I must reach unto.    But yet I run before my horse to market.    Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns.    When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
No,'tis to thyself.
I will unbolt to you.    You see how all conditions, how all minds,    As well of glib and slippery creatures as    Of grave and austere quality, tender down    Their services to Lord Timon:   his large fortune    Upon his good and gracious nature hanging    Subdues and properties to his love and tendance    All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glass-faced flatterer    To Apemantus, that few things loves better    Than to abhor himself:   even he drops down    The knee before him, and returns in peace    Most rich in Timon's nod.
What do you say, Cesario?Good my lord
Weke, weke! so cries a pig prepared to the spit.
Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,    Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort;    Whose high exploits and honourable deeds    Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,    Be bold in us:   we'll follow where thou lead'st,    Like stinging bees in hottest summer's day    Led by their master to the flowered fields,    And be avenged on cursed Tamora.
I will dispatch it straight.
I have been in many; but such a night as this,Till now, I ne'er endured.
I dreamt a dream tonight.
[Aside]  Simonides!
Why, some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrown upon them. I was one, sir, in this interlude, one Sir Topas, sir, but thats all one.   [imitates MALVOLIO]   By the Lord, fool, I am not mad.   But do you remember? Madam, why laugh you at sucha barren rascal; an you smile not, hes gagged?   and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
This is a most majestic vision, and    Harmonious charmingly.   May I be bold    To think these spirits?
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.
That? What?
A very handsome man.
Hang all the husbandsThat cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourselfHardly one subject.
The best of happiness,Honour and fortunes, keep with you, Lord Timon!
See, not a man in private conferenceOr council has respect with him but he.
How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Nor I. My spirits are nimble.    They fell together all, as by consent.    They dropped, as by a thunderstroke.   What might,    Worthy Sebastian, O, what might? No more.    And yet methinks I see it in thy face,    What thou shouldst be.   Th' occasion speaks thee, and    My strong imagination sees a crown    Dropping upon thy head.
Am I like such a fellow?
Even he that makes her queen. Who else should be?
[aside]  And lessened be that small, God I beseech Him!Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.
O noble prince, I can discover all    The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.    There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,    That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples, thatthey speak i' th' nose thus?
Unless for that he comes to be your liege, You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
I say a husband.
Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora;    She is thy enemy, and I thy friend:    I am Revenge: sent from the infernal kingdom,    To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind,    By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.    Come down, and welcome me to this world's light;    Confer with me of murder and of death:    There's not a hollow cave or lurking-place,    No vast obscurity or misty vale,    Where bloody murder or detested rape    Can couch for fear, but I will find them out;    And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,    Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.
How now, sirrah! How goes the world with thee?
[to CALIBAN]  Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himselfUpon thy wicked dam, come forth!
It is yours;    And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,    So like you, 'tis the worse.   Behold, my lords,    Although the print be little, the whole matter    And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,    The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,    The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,    His smiles,    The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:    And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it    So like to him that got it, if thou hast    The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours    No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,    Her children not her husband's!
Doth this news hold of good King Edwards death?
No, no, men living flatter those that die.
I may not, madam:To the contrary I have express commandment.
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!    Most miserable hour that eer time saw    In lasting labor of his pilgrimage.    But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,    But one thing to rejoice and solace in,    And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!
And keep your mind, till you return to us,Peaceful and comfortable!
Go get thee hence, and find my dog again,    Or ne'er return again into my sight.    Away, I say! Stay'st thou to vex me here?
Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.
It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting.
Faith, none for me;   except the north-east wind,    Which then blew bitterly against our faces,    Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance    Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
Oh, then belike you fancy riches more.You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me,    would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old    man and his son aboard the prince:   told him I heard    them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he    at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter,    so he then took her to be, who began to be much    sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of    weather continuing,   this mystery remained    undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I    been the finder out of this secret, it would not    have relished among my other discredits.    [Enter Shepherd and Clown]    Here come those I have done good to against my will,    and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady?
Exton, I thank thee not;   for thou hast wrought    A deed of slander with thy fatal hand    Upon my head and all this famous land.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead!That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Please you. But I had rather kill two enemies.
Away,Thou tedious rogue! I am sorry I shall loseA stone by thee.
Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for here's nothingto be got now-a-days, unless thou canst fish for't.
O, none so welcome.
Marcus, my brother! 'tis sad Titus calls.
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, myshoulder-blade is out.
Good fellows all,    The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.    Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake,    Let's yet be fellows; let's shake our heads, and say,    As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes,    'We have seen better days.'   Let each take some;    Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more:    Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
The captain that did bring me first on shore    Hath my maids garments.   He, upon some action,    Is now in durance at Malvolios suit,    A gentleman and follower of my ladys.
Alas, my father, it befits not me    Unto a stranger knight to be so bold:    He may my proffer take for an offence,    Since men take women's gifts for impudence.
Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.
Alas the day!
It is my son, young Harry Percy,Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.Harry, how fares your uncle?
Let's have that, good sir.Come on, sit down: come on, and do your bestTo fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?    Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,    That set'st the word itself against the word!    Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land;    The chopping French we do not understand.    Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there;    Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear;    That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,    Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
Traitors!Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroostedBy thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.
Music, awake her; strike!  [Music]    'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;    Strike all that look upon with marvel.   Come,    I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away,    Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him    Dear life redeems you.   You perceive she stirs:    [HERMIONE comes down]    Start not; her actions shall be holy as    You hear my spell is lawful:   do not shun her    Until you see her die again; for then    You kill her double.   Nay, present your hand:    When she was young you woo'd her; now in age    Is she become the suitor?
Shepherdess,A fair one are youwell you fit our agesWith flowers of winter.
I am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to be thought a good student,   but to be saidan honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a great scholar. The competitors enter.
Alcibiades banished!
What say you? Can you love the gentleman?    This night you shall behold him at our feast.    Read oer the volume of young Paris face    And find delight writ there with beautys pen.    Examine every married lineament    And see how one another lends content,    And what obscured in this fair volume lies    Find written in the margin of his eyes.    This precious book of love, this unbound lover,    To beautify him only lacks a cover.    The fish lives in the sea, and tis much pride    For fair without the fair within to hide.    That book in manys eyes doth share the glory    That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.    So shall you share all that he doth possess    By having him, making yourself no less.
Your Grace may do your pleasure.
Had he done so?
Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.
Nathaniels coat, sir, was not fully made,    And Gabriels pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel.    There was no link to color Peters hat,    And Walters dagger was not come from sheathing.    There were none fine but Adam, Rafe, and Gregory.    The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly.    Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
Tell thou the tale! But hadst thou not crossed me, thoushouldst have heard how her horse fell, and she under her horse.   Thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place,how she was bemoiled, how he left her with the horse upon her,   how he beat me because her horse stumbled, howshe waded through the dirt to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed that never prayed before,   how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I lost my crupper, with many things of worthymemory which now shall die in oblivion, and thou returnunexperienced to thy grave.
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?
He will not say so.
Even as my life, or blood that fosters it.
And shall I have?
Now by my George, my Garter, and my crown
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
[reads]  With a small-compassed cape
Are there no stones in heavenBut what serve for the thunder?Precious villain!
Away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard,look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane,   and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.Antony and Potpan!
So infinitely endear'd
Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at theproclamation; but he made a groan at it, and sworehe would see her to-morrow.
And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.
How now, Cassio!
Most certain. Let our catch be Thou Knave.
I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awakethe beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir upthe lewdly-inclined. I'll bring home some to-night.
Why, I think so. I am not such an ass, but I can keep my hand dry. But whats your jest?
[To TRANIO]   Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:    The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,    Her father keeps from all access of suitors    And will not promise her to any man    Until the elder sister first be wed.    The younger then is free, and not before.
Now, good Camillo;I am so fraught with curious business thatI leave out ceremony.
A love song, a love song.
It is too true an evil. Gone she is.    And whats to come of my despisèd time    Is naught but bitterness. Now, Roderigo,    Where didst thou see her?   Oh, unhappy girl!    With the Moor, sayst thou?Who would be a father?    How didst thou know twas she?   Oh, she deceives me    Past thought!What said she to you?Get more tapers,    Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?
What is your pleasure?
For this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps,    Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. Urchins    Shall, forth at vast of night that they may work,    All exercise on thee.   Thou shalt be pinched    As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging    Than bees that made 'em.
I must, shell rail in the street else.
Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Good time of day unto your royal Grace.
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?
Spirit,We must prepare to meet with Caliban.
Ay, and for that thou diest.
I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman,    But, had it been the brother of my blood,    I must have done no less with wit and safety.    You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that    I do perceive it hath offended you.    Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows    We made each other but so late ago.
Give you good morrow, sir.
Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause    To wail the dimming of our shining star,    But none can help our harms by wailing them.    Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;    I did not see your Grace.   Humbly on my knee    I crave your blessing.
Of her society    Be not afraid. I met her deity    Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son    Dove-drawn with her.   Here thought they to have done    Some wanton charm upon this man and maid,    Whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid    Till Hymens torch be lightedbut in vain.    Marss hot minion is returned again.    Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows,    Swears he will shoot no more, but play with sparrows    And be a boy right out.
'Tis most nobly spoken.
All broken implements of a ruin'd house.
Is there no manners left among maids? will they    wear their plackets where they should bear their    faces?   Is there not milking-time, when you are    going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these    secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all    our guests?   'tis well they are whispering: clamour    your tongues, and not a word more.
Whos there? Whose noise is this that ones on murder?
Nay, faith, Ill see the church a' your back, and then come back to my masters as soon as I can.
Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen,    cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one    joy crown another, so and in such manner that it    seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their    joy waded in tears.   There was casting up of eyes,    holding up of hands, with countenances of such    distraction that they were to be known by garment,    not by favour.   Our king, being ready to leap out of    himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that    joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother,    thy mother!'   then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then    embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his    daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old    shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten    conduit of many kings' reigns.   I never heard of such    another encounter, which lames report to follow it    and undoes description to do it.
In those that practise them they are, my lord.
With her?
We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.
To her, Kate!
Here were the servants of your adversary,    And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.    I drew to part them.   In the instant came    The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,    Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,    He swung about his head and cut the winds,    Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.    While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,    Came more and more and fought on part and part,    Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Off with his son Georges head!
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee    To make the base earth proud with kissing it:    Me rather had my heart might feel your love    Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.    Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,    Thus high at least, although your knee be low.
I cannot tell, except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance.   Take you assurance of her cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum.   To th' church take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient honest witnesses.    If this be not that you look for, I have no more to say,    But bid Bianca farewell forever and a day.
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.I fear, I fear,
So 'tis: this comes off well and excellent.
What, are you hurt, lieutenant?
I am a maid,    My lord, that ne'er before invited eyes,    But have been gazed on like a comet:   she speaks,    My lord, that, may be, hath endured a grief    Might equal yours, if both were justly weigh'd.    Though wayward fortune did malign my state,    My derivation was from ancestors    Who stood equivalent with mighty kings:    But time hath rooted out my parentage,    And to the world and awkward casualties    Bound me in servitude.     [Aside]     I will desist;    But there is something glows upon my cheek,    And whispers in mine ear, 'Go not till he speak.'
Sir, sir, sir
So 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should havemarried a shepherd's daughter.
Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life.    For that's an article within our law,    As dangerous as the rest. Your time's expired:    Either expound now, or receive your sentence.
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves:   my    father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll    not trouble them.   Come, bring away thy pack after    me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's    have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
I understand you not.
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied    With Romeo, till I behold himdead    Is my poor heart for a kinsman vexed.    Madam, if you could find out but a man    To bear a poison, I would temper it,    That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,    Soon sleep in quiet.   Oh, how my heart abhors    To hear him named, and cannot come to him.    To wreak the love I bore my cousin    Upon his body that slaughtered him!
Come, bring us, bring us where he is.
[within]  Mercy on us! We split, we split! Farewell, my wife and children! Farewell, brother! We split, we split, we split!
Go, Sir Andrew. Scout me for him at the corner the orchard like a bum-baily.   So soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou drawest, swear horrible,   for it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would have earned him. Away!
Will you hear me, Roderigo?
Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;    My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!    Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,    Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.
Write from us to him. Post-post-haste, dispatch.
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
Where goes Cesario?
[sings]    When that I was and a little tiny boy,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    A foolish thing was but a toy,    For the rain it raineth every day.    But when I came to mans estate,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,    For the rain it raineth every day.    But when I came, alas! to wive,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    By swaggering could I never thrive,    For the rain it raineth every day.    But when I came unto my beds,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    With toss-pots still had drunken heads,    For the rain it raineth every day.    A great while ago the world begun,    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,    But thats all one, our play is done,    And well strive to please you every day.
How? Unlawfully?
To have a foolish wife.
Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsinos is returned. I could hardly entreat him back. He attends your ladyships pleasure.
I am resolved.
[gives him a paper]  Well, hie thee to thy lord. I kiss his hand. My letter will resolve him of my mind.Farewell.
Why thats with watching, twill away again. Let me but bind it hard, within this hourIt will be well.  [pulls out a handkerchief]
Well, in that hit you miss. Shell not be hit    With Cupids arrow. She hath Dians wit.    And, in strong proof of chastity well armed    From loves weak childish bow, she lives uncharmed.    She will not stay the siege of loving terms,    Nor bide th encounter of assailing eyes,    Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.    Oh, she is rich in beauty, only poor    That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
The gods are witness,Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer griefFor his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.
And some have greatness thrust upon them.
A lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was yet of many accounted beautiful.   But though I could not with such estimable wonder overfar believe that, yetthus far I will boldly publish her: she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair.  She is drowned already, sir, with salt water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more.
Of what personage and years is he?
Hell be hanged yet, though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him.
I' faith, or I either?
Ay, sir. Where lies that? If twere a kibe,    'Twould put me to my slipper. But I feel not    This deity in my bosom.   Twenty consciences,    That stand twixt me and Milan, candied be they    And melt ere they molest!   Here lies your brother,    No better than the earth he lies upon,    If he were that which now hes like, thats dead;    Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it,    Can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus,    To the perpetual wink for aye might put    This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who    Should not upbraid our course.   For all the rest,    Theyll take suggestion as a cat laps milk.    Theyll tell the clock to any business that    We say befits the hour.
You have mistook, my lady,    Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!    Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,    Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,    Should a like language use to all degrees    And mannerly distinguishment leave out    Betwixt the prince and beggar:   I have said    She's an adulteress; I have said with whom:    More, she's a traitor and Camillo is    A federary with her,   and one that knows    What she should shame to know herself    But with her most vile principal, that she's    A bed-swerver, even as bad as those    That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy    To this their late escape.
O, sir, we doubt it not.
I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring aCressida to this Troilus.
[as CAMBIO]  While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
O gentle lady, do not put me to t,For I am nothing, if not critical.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate    Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love    Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me    With hate in those where I expect most love.    When I have most need to employ a friend,    And most assurèd that he is a friend,    Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile    Be he unto me:   this do I beg of God    When I am cold in love to you or yours.
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious, Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord.    He cried upon it at the merest loss,    And twice today picked out the dullest scent.    Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
[as LUCENTIO]  What countryman, I pray?
A most unhappy one. I would do much T' atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
The swifter speed the better.
My lord?
AEmilius, do this message honourably:And if he stand on hostage for his safety,Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.
Oh, wretched villain!
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all thefaults I have committed to your worship and to giveme your good report to the prince my master.
Virtue? A fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our willsare gardeners.   So that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with manyeither to have it sterile with idleness, or manured with industrywhy, the power and corrigible authority of thislies in our wills.   If the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous conclusions.   But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbittedlusts. Whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.
Soft! see how busily she turns the leaves!
I am hers.But oh, how oddly will it sound that IMust ask my child forgiveness!
Have you importuned him by any means?
You are an alchemist; make gold of that.Out, rascal dogs!
Well, we may meet again.
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune,    Why strewst thou sugar on that bottled spider,    Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?    Fool, fool, thou whetst a knife to kill thyself.    The day will come that thou shalt wish for me    To help thee curse that poisonous bunch-backed toad.
I thank thee. Lead me on.
I can say little more than I have studied, and that questions out of my part.   Good gentle one, give me modest assurance if you be the lady of the house, that Imay proceed in my speech.
Sir,We have a maid in Mytilene, I durst wager,Would win some words of him.
Widow Dido said you? You make me study of that. She was of Carthage, not of Tunis.
Oh, that I served that lady    And might not be delivered to the world,    Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,    What my estate is.
My dear lord,
Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan    The outward habit by the inward man.    But stay, the knights are coming: we will withdraw    Into the gallery.
[Aside]   What will this come to?    He commands us to provide, and give great gifts,    And all out of an empty coffer:    Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,    To show him what a beggar his heart is,    Being of no power to make his wishes good:    His promises fly so beyond his state    That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes    For every word: he is so kind that he now    Pays interest for 't; his land's put to their books.    Well, would I were gently put out of office    Before I were forced out!    Happier is he that has no friend to feed    Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.    I bleed inwardly for my lord.
Where it seems best unto your royal self.    If I may counsel you, some day or two    Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower;    Then where you please and shall be thought most fit    For your best health and recreation.
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it    That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else    In the dark backward and abysm of time?    If thou rememberest aught ere thou camest here,    How thou camest here thou mayst.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.    Her body sleeps in Capels monument,    And her immortal part with angels lives.    I saw her laid low in her kindreds vault    And presently took post to tell it you.    O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,    Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
No harm.    I have done nothing but in care of thee,    Of thee, my dear onethee my daughter, who    Art ignorant of what thou art,   naught knowing    Of whence I am, nor that I am more better    Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell    And thy no greater father.
A most virtuous princess.
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.
Press me not, beseech you, so.    There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,    So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,    Were there necessity in your request, although    'Twere needful I denied it.   My affairs    Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder    Were in your love a whip to me;   my stay    To you a charge and trouble: to save both,    Farewell, our brother.
Zounds, sir, youre robbed! For shame, put on your gown.    Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul.    Even now, now, very now, an old black ram    Is tupping your white ewe.   Arise, arise,    Awake the snorting citizens with the bell    Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.    Arise, I say!
Ay.
Ay, my good lord.
And whats her history?
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon,These bloody accidents must excuse my mannersThat so neglected you.
Out o' tune, sir. You lie.   Art any more than a steward?   Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shallbe no more cakes and ale?
She had; and would incense meTo murder her I married.
Yea, forsooth, an your mistership be emperial.
Even in his throatunless it be the kingThat calls me traitor, I return the lie.
But now the duke of Buckingham and IAre come from visiting his majesty.
What, my lord! dispraise?
Tell me thine first.
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot    The foul witch Sycorax,   who with age and envy    Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?
Pitiful sight! Here lies the county slain,    And Juliet bleeding, warm and newly dead,    Who here hath lain these two days buried.    Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.    Raise up the Montagues.    Some others search.
Look to the drawbridge there!
An if she were a thornier piece of ground than sheis, she shall be ploughed.
Relent, and save your souls.    Which of youif you were a prince's son    Being pent from liberty, as I am now    If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,    Would you not entreat for life?   Ay, you would beg,    Were you in my distress.
We may live, son, to shed many more.
Nay, tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful case for me to leave his service   look you, sir: he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir.   Well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see, two-and-thirty, a pip out?    Whom, would to God, I had well knocked at first,    Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
[reads]   To the unknown beloved, this, and my good wishesHer very phrases! By your leave, wax.  Soft! And the impressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal.'Tis my lady. To whom should this be?
Humbly complaining to her deity    Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.    Ill tell you what: I think it is our way,    If we will keep in favor with the king,    To be her men and wear her livery.    The jealous o'erworn widow and herself,    Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen,    Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.
Thou singst sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
Good as the best. Promising is the very air o' the    time: it opens the eyes of expectation:    performance is ever the duller for his act;   and,    but in the plainer and simpler kind of people, the    deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is    most courtly and fashionable:   performance is a kind    of will or testament which argues a great sickness    in his judgment that makes it.
Good, i' faith. Come, begin.
I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
How? Is this true?
How?
Then, tell me,Whos the next heir of Naples?
What is it?
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,    Brags of his substance, not of ornament.    They are but beggars that can count their worth.    But my true love is grown to such excess    I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
What a strange case was that! now, before the gods,    I am ashamed on't. Denied that honourable man!    there was very little honour showed in't. For my own    part, I must needs confess, I have received some    small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels    and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his;    yet, had he mistook him and sent to me, I should    ne'er have denied his occasion so many talents.
Hey, Mountain, hey!
Ill slit the villains nose that would have sent me tothe jail.
These violent delights have violent ends    And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,    Which, as they kiss, consume.   The sweetest honey    Is loathsome in his own deliciousness    And in the taste confounds the appetite.    Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.    Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
[as LUCENTIO]   And you, sir. You are welcome.Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
I do protest I never injured thee,    But love thee better than thou canst devise,    Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.    And so, good Capuletwhich name I tender    As dearly as my ownbe satisfied.
Hast thou read truth?
Every man shift for all the rest and let no man take care for himself, for all is but fortune. Coraggio, bully-monster, coraggio!
I will not fail. Tis twenty year till then.I have forgot why I did call thee back.
[Aside]  To laughter, as I take it,If the good truth were known.
Swum ashore, man, like a duck. I can swim like a duck, Ill be sworn.
Oh, are you come, Iago? You have done well,That men must lay their murders on your neck.
Oh, heres a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!
Dost thou hear, Iago?I will be found most cunning in my patience,Butdost thou hear?most bloody.
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitifulone, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
[as LUCENTIO]  Then thou wert best say that I am notLucentio.
I pray God he be not, I say.
Sir,    Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea,    Shook as the earth did quake;    The very principals did seem to rend,    And all-to topple: pure surprise and fear    Made me to quit the house.
You will be there, I know.
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must.But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanksThat were the cause of my imprisonment.
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Sirrah, come hither: make no more ado,    But give your pigeons to the emperor:    By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.    Hold, hold; meanwhile here's money for thy charges.    Give me pen and ink. Sirrah, can you with a grace    deliver a supplication?
[to RICHARD]  Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,Rivers, that died at Pomfret. Despair, and die!
Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my meanTo bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.
[Gives her the vial]   Hold. Get you gone. Be strong and prosperousIn this resolve. Ill send a friar with speedTo Mantua with my letters to thy lord.
What, household stuff?
[reads]     Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold.    For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.    A thing devisèd by the enemy.    Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge.    Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls.    Conscience is but a word that cowards use,    Devised at first to keep the strong in awe.    Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.    March on.   Join bravely. Let us to it pell mell    If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.     [his oration to his army]     What shall I say more than I have inferred?    Remember whom you are to cope withal,    A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways,    A scum of Bretons and base lackey peasants,    Whom their o'er-cloyèd country vomits forth    To desperate ventures and assured destruction.    You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;    You having lands and blessed with beauteous wives,    They would restrain the one, distain the other.    And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,    Long kept in Brittany at our mothers cost,    A milksop, one that never in his life    Felt so much cold as overshoes in snow?    Lets whip these stragglers o'er the seas again,    Lash hence these overweening rags of France,    These famished beggars weary of their lives,    Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit,    For want of means, poor rats, had hanged themselves.    If we be conquered, let men conquer us,    And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers    Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped,    And in record, left them the heirs of shame.    Shall these enjoy our lands, lie with our wives,    Ravish our daughters?
Ay, but hark you, my friend; 'twas we that made up    this garment through the rough seams of the waters:    there are certain condolements, certain vails. I    hope, sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from    whence you had it.
Excellent good.
Put in now, Titus.
You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must tothe watch.
[To LUCENTIO]    Come, Kate, well to bed.    We three are married, but you two are sped.    'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white,    And, being a winner, God give you good night!
What, art thou hurt?
Signior Petruchio, fie, you are to blame.Come, mistress Kate, Ill bear you company.
And what says she to my little jewel?
Whats the matter, lieutenant?
But good lieutenant, is your general wived?
Why, man?
True;When the day serves, before black-corner'd night,Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light. Come.
The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar. Cressida was a beggar.   My lady is within, sir. Iwill construe to them whence you come.   Who you are and what you would are out of my welkin, I might say element, but the word is overworn.
Are you content to stay?
I say she shall.And first begin with her.
[To MALVOLIO]  Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
Kill'd her, for whom my tears have made me blind.    I am as woful as Virginius was,    And have a thousand times more cause than he    To do this outrage: and it now is done.
Oh, a thousand thousand timesand then of so gentle a condition!
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter    His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence,    A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,    To execute the charge my father gave me    For visiting your highness:   my best train    I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;    Who for Bohemia bend, to signify    Not only my success in Libya, sir,    But my arrival and my wife's in safety    Here where we are.
How chance the prophet could not at that timeHave told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
I'll have it so. My steward!
Hed sow t with nettle seed.
Belike, for joy the emperor hath a son.
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.
[Aside to her sons]    What say you, boys? will you    bide with him,    Whiles I go tell my lord the emperor    How I have govern'd our determined jest?    Yield to his humour, smooth and speak him fair,    And tarry with him till I turn again.
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
[aside to ANTONIO]  I say, tonight. No more.
If twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
O, patience!The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.
Ill stay a month longer.   I am a fellow o' th' strangest mind i' th' world. I delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether.
Why will you kill me?
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,    No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks    Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.    Nights candles are burnt out, and jocund day    Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.    I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,As beasts and birds and fishes.
It's fit it should be so; for princes are    A model which heaven makes like to itself:    As jewels lose their glory if neglected,    So princes their renowns if not respected.    'Tis now your honour, daughter, to explain    The labour of each knight in his device.
Come on, strike up!
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!    Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,    So soon forsaken?   Young mens love then lies    Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.    Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine    Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!    How much salt water thrown away in waste    To season love that of it doth not taste!    The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,    Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears.    Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit    Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.    If eer thou wast thyself and these woes thine,    Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.    And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence then:    Women may fall when theres no strength in men.
Ill be revenged on the whole pack of you.
He had need mean better than his outward show    Can any way speak in his just commend;    For by his rusty outside he appears    To have practised more the whipstock than the lance.
Why, thats my spirit!But was not this nigh shore?
Now all the blessings    Of a glad father, compass thee about.    Arise, and say how thou camest here.
Content.
Alas the day! I never gave him cause.
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself    against such a good time, when I might ha' shown    myself honourable!   how unluckily it happened, that I    should purchase the day before for a little part,    and undo a great deal of honoured!   Servilius, now,    before the gods, I am not able to do,the more    beast, I say:I was sending to use Lord Timon    myself, these gentlemen can witness!   but I would    not, for the wealth of Athens, I had done't now.    Commend me bountifully to his good lordship;   and I    hope his honour will conceive the fairest of me,    because I have no power to be kind:   and tell him    this from me, I count it one of my greatest    afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an    honourable gentleman.   Good Servilius, will you    befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him?
I cannot believe that in her. Shes full of most blessed condition.
We should have both lord and lown, if the peevishbaggage would but give way to customers.
For everUnvenerable be thy hands, if thouTakest up the princess by that forced basenessWhich he has put upon't!
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be acreature of sale.
Nothing but this: your true love for my master.
Oh, she was foul!    I scarce did know you, uncle.   There lies your niece,    Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped.    I know this act shows horrible and grim.
Ha! Ha! False to me?
That which thou canst not undo.
Oh, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste witha distempered appetite.   To be generous, guiltless, and of free disposition is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets.   There is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail.   Nor no railing in a known discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove.
Your mother.
Ready to go, but never to return.    O son! The night before thy wedding day    Hath death lain with thy wife. There she lies,    Flower as she was, deflowered by him.    Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir.    My daughter he hath wedded. I will die,    And leave him all. Life, living, all is Deaths.
Why of thy thought, Iago?
Let me live here ever.So rare a wondered father and a wifeMakes this place paradise.
This gentleman of mine hath served me long:    To build his fortune I will strain a little,    For 'tis a bond in men.   Give him thy daughter:    What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise,    And make him weigh with her.
Good morr ow, lords:O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?
I like this well; he will return again.
Being done, there is no pause.
[aside]    I will converse with iron-witted fools    And unrespective boys.   None are for me    That look into me with considerate eyes.    High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.    Boy!
Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
However God or fortune cast my lot,    There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,    A loyal, just and upright gentleman:    Never did captive with a freer heart    Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace    His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,    More than my dancing soul doth celebrate    This feast of battle with mine adversary.    Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,    Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:    As gentle and as jocund as to jest    Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.
I cannot think but your age has forgot me;    It could not else be,   I should prove so base,    To sue, and be denied such common grace:    My wounds ache at you.
My father, as nurse said, did never fear,    But cried 'Good seaman!' to the sailors, galling    His kingly hands, haling ropes;    And, clasping to the mast, endured a sea    That almost burst the deck.
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
So did we woo    Transformed Timon to our city's love    By humble message and by promised means:    We were not all unkind, nor all deserve    The common stroke of war.
Thou liest.
You the like loss?
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an'tlike you, sir?
I thought as much.    One sorrow never comes but brings an heir,    That may succeed as his inheritor;    And so in ours:   some neighbouring nation,    Taking advantage of our misery,    Hath stuff'd these hollow vessels with their power,    To beat us down, the which are down already;    And make a conquest of unhappy me,    Whereas no glory's got to overcome.
Yes, tis Emilia.    (to EMILIA)    By and by.   Shes dead.    'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassios death,    The noise was high. Ha!   No more moving?    Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were t good?    I think she stirs againNo. Whats best to do?    If she come in, shell sure speak to my wife    My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.    Oh, insupportable! Oh, heavy hour!    Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse    Of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe    Should yawn at alteration.
Lets meet him and receive him.
Love wrought these miracles. Biancas love    Made me exchange my state with Tranio,    While he did bear my countenance in the town,    And happily I have arrivèd at the last    Unto the wishèd haven of my bliss.    What Tranio did, myself enforced him to.    Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
I can bear my part; you must know 'tis myoccupation; have at it with you.
There, hold!    I will not look upon your master's lines:    I know they are stuff'd with protestations    And full of new-found oaths; which he will break    As easily as I do tear his paper.
[To CALIBAN]  Come, kiss.
Why did he so?
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?Stay you, goodgentlemen.Look you pale, mistress?    Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.    Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her.    Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness    Will speak, though tongues were out of use.
Do you not hear me speak?
What a pied ninnys this! Thou scurvy patch!    I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows    And take his bottle from him.   When thats gone,    He shall drink naught but brine, for Ill not show him    Where the quick freshes are.
Will you help?An ass-head, and a coxcomb, and a knave,a thin-faced knave, a gull!
And so swear I.
This same should be the voice of Friar John.Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,    Made to write whore upon? What committed?    Committed? O thou public commoner!    I should make very forges of my cheeks    That would to cinders burn up modesty    Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?    Heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks,    The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets    Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth    And will not hear t.   What committed!    Impudent strumpet!
Romeo, the love I bear thee can affordNo better term than this: thou art a villain.
What noise there, ho?
No.    [to ANTONIO]     For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother    Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive    Thy rankest fault, all of them,   a   nd require    My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know,    Thou must restore.
[Kneeling]  I have ground the axe myself;Do you but strike the blow.
No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the minstrel.
Art thou so hasty? I have stayed for thee,God knows, in torment and in agony.
Hang thee, monster!
Then God be blessed, it is the blessèd sun.    But sun it is not, when you say it is not,    And the moon changes even as your mind.    What you will have it named, even that it is,    And so it shall be so for Katherine.
Never till this daySaw I him touched with anger so distempered.
Verily!    You put me off with limber vows; but I,    Though you would seek t'unsphere the    stars with oaths,    Should yet say 'Sir, no going.'   Verily,    You shall not go. A lady's 'Verily' is    As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?    Force me to keep you as a prisoner,    Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees    When you depart, and save your thanks.   How say you?    My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'    One of them you shall be.
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusions cure lives not    In these confusions. Heaven and yourself    Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,    And all the better is it for the maid.    Your part in her you could not keep from death,    But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.    The most you sought was her promotion,    For twas your heaven she should be advanced.    And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced    Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?    Oh, in this love, you love your child so ill    That you run mad, seeing that she is well.    Shes not well married that lives married long,    But shes best married that dies married young.    Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary    On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,    And in her best array, bear her to church.    For though some nature bids us all lament,    Yet natures tears are reasons merriment.
E'er since I can remember.
Come, come, you wasp. I' faith, you are too angry.
'Tis neither here nor there.
I fear he will. Here Catesby comes again.
Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.
Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this?    Are we turned Turks? And to ourselves do that    Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?    For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl.    He that stirs next to carve for his own rage    Holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion.    Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle    From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?    Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,    Speak, who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.
If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,And in the breath of bitter words lets smotherMy damnèd son that thy two sweet sons smothered.
What less than doomsday is the Princes doom?
Of either, madam.
Where should this music be? I' th' air or th' earth?    It sounds no more, and sure, it waits upon    Some god o' th' island.   Sitting on a bank,    Weeping again the king my fathers wrack,    This music crept by me upon the waters,    Allaying both their fury and my passion    With its sweet air. Thence I have followed it,    Or it hath drawn me rather.   But tis gone.    No, it begins again.
Art thou indeed?
How but well, sir? How but well? It were impossible I should speed amiss.
This is as uncivil as strange.   I beseech you, do me this courteous office, as to know of the knight what my offense to him is.   It is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.
Not Cassio killed! Then murders out of tune, And sweet revenge grows harsh.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.    'Tis proper I obey him, but not now.    Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,    Which, like unruly children, make their sire    Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:    Give some supportance to the bending twigs.    Go thou, and like an executioner,    Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,    That look too lofty in our commonwealth:    All must be even in our government.    You thus employ'd, I will go root away    The noisome weeds, which without profit suck    The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Arise, dissembler. Though I wish thy death,I will not be the executioner.
[Draws his sword]  Part, fools!Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Wheres thy conscience now?
Some light-foot friend post to the duke of NorfolkRatcliffe, thyself, or Catesby. Where is he?
How with mine honor may I give him thatWhich I have given to you?
I have a daughter, sir, called Katherina.
(  aside  ) O peace, peace, peace! Now, now.
Dost thou say so?
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?
If you would seek us,We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?
Call up her father.    Rouse him. Make after him, Poison his delight,    Proclaim him in the streets. Incense her kinsmen,    And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,    Plague him with flies.   Though that his joy be joy    Yet throw such changes of vexation ont,    As it may lose some color.
Dead?
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?    The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,    And the place death, considering who thou art,    If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells youcurrish thanks is good enough for such a present.
You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.
Oh, then I see that madmen have no ears.
They're welcome all; let 'em have kind admittance:Music, make their welcome!
[To SEBASTIAN]  Now, sir, have I met you again? Theres for you.
Byr Lady, thirty years.
You see this confluence, this great flood    of visitors.    I have, in this rough work, shaped out a man,    Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug    With amplest entertainment:   my free drift    Halts not particularly, but moves itself    In a wide sea of wax:   no levell'd malice    Infects one comma in the course I hold;    But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on,    Leaving no tract behind.
Thou liest.
No, not a word; how can I grace my talk,Wanting a hand to give it action?Thou hast the odds of me; therefore no more.
Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
I know her answer.
It is the more like to be feigned. I pray you, keep it in.   I heard you were saucy at my gates and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you.   If you be not mad, be gone. If you have reason, be brief.    'Tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.
Presently.    Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin,    For to deny each article with oath    Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception    That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet tis that sounds.
So had you need.    In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,    And I am tied to be obedient    For so your father charged me at our parting,    "Be serviceable to my son," quoth he,    Although I think 'twas in another sense    I am content to be Lucentio    Because so well I love Lucentio.
Will it not be?Faith, sirrah, an youll not knock, Ill ring it.Ill try how you can  sol, fa,  and sing it.
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!
Ha?
[aside to  TAILOR  ]  Tailor, Ill pay thee for thy gown tomorrow.Take no unkindness of his hasty words.Away, I say. Commend me to thy master.
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her    hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her    virginity; and cry 'He that will give most shall    have her first.'   Such a maidenhead were no cheap    thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done    as I command you.
No, madam. We have culled such necessaries    As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.    So please you, let me now be left alone,    And let the Nurse this night sit up with you.    For, I am sure, you have your hands full all    In this so sudden business.
Yes, thou spokest well of me.
To such proceeding    Who ever but his approbation added,    Though not his prime consent,   he did not flow    From honourable sources.
The better for him. Would I were so too.
I do not think there is any such woman.
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,    Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,    And lay aside my high blood's royalty,    Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.    If guilty dread have left thee so much strength    As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop:    By that and all the rites of knighthood else,    Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,    What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.
Didst perceive it?  [Aside]  They're here with me already, whispering, rounding'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,That he did stay?
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i faith, wisely, wisely.
Well, come, my Kate. We will unto your fathers    Even in these honest mean habiliments.    Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor,    For tis the mind that makes the body rich,    And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,    So honor peereth in the meanest habit.    What, is the jay more precious than the lark    Because his feathers are more beautiful?    Or is the adder better than the eel    Because his painted skin contents the eye?    Oh, no, good Kate. Neither art thou the worse    For this poor furniture and mean array.    If thou accountst it shame, lay it on me,    And therefore frolic! We will hence forthwith    To feast and sport us at thy fathers house.    [To  GRUMIO  ]   Go, call my men, and let us straight to him,    And bring our horses unto Long Lane end.    There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.    Lets see, I think tis now some seven o'clock,    And well we may come there by dinnertime.
Then, by myself
Let him come near.
My language! Heavens,I am the best of them that speak this speech,Were I but where tis spoken.
What say'st thou?
[aside]    I must be married to my brothers daughter,    Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.    Murder her brothers, and then marry her    Uncertain way of gain.   But I am in    So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.    Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
And is it not well served into a sweet goose?
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue thatput me into this apparel.
Ay, Desdemona.
I think there is not in the world either malice or    matter to alter it.   You have an unspeakable    comfort of your young prince Mamillius:   it is a    gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came    into my note.
Take hands, a bargain!And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:I give my daughter to him, and will makeHer portion equal his.
Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I willpromise him an excellent piece.
I am bound to thee forever.
Ill show thee the best springs. Ill pluck thee berries.    Ill fish for thee and get thee wood enough.    A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!    Ill bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,    Thou wondrous man.
Ay, but (by your leave) not before me. The lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. Lets have no more ofthis, lets to our affairs.Forgive us our sins!Gentlemen, lets look to our business.   Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.
[to gentlemen and halberds]     What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid?    Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,    And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.    Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell.    Thou hadst but power over his mortal body;    His soul thou canst not have. Therefore begone.
Read it.
Why, there it goes: God give his lordship joy!
Hum, ha!
Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy,has done little better than played the jack with us.
Why, what would you?
You either fear his humor or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love.   Is he inconstant, sir, in his favors?
This shows a sound affection.
Will you leave me there?
I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me. Theres money for thee.  [giving money]  If you tarry longer, I shall give worse payment.
Here comes the Countess. Now heaven walks on earth.    But for thee, fellow. Fellow, thy words are madness:    Three months this youth hath tended upon me;    But more of that anon.   [To an officer]   Take him aside.
No, madam, no. I may not leave it so.I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
But did you not request to have it cut?
It is, and wants but nomination.
Alas, poor Romeo! He is already dead, stabbed with a white wenchs black eye, shot through the ear with a love song,   the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boys butt shaft. And is he a man to encounterTybalt?
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
I know not.
Contain thyself, good friend.
I'll do any thing now that is virtuous; but Iam out of the road of rutting for ever.
What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,That art thyself a man?
[as LUCENTIO]  Thats but a cavil: he is old, I young.
[taking HASTINGSs hand]  By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate, And with my hand I seal my true hearts love.
Do you not hear him? You mar our labor. Keep your cabins.You do assist the storm.
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,I dreamt my master and another fought,And that my master slew him.
Ha' not you seen, Camillo    But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass    Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,   or heard,    For to a vision so apparent rumour    Cannot be mute,or thought,for cogitation    Resides not in that man that does not think,    My wife is slippery?   If thou wilt confess,    Or else be impudently negative,    To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say    My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name    As rank as any flax-wench that puts to    Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.
Sir,With all my heart; and, when you come ashore,I have another suit.
Softly, my masters. If you be gentlemen,    Do me this right: hear me with patience.    Baptista is a noble gentleman,    To whom my father is not all unknown,    And were his daughter fairer than she is,    She may more suitors have,   and me for one.    Fair Ledas daughter had a thousand wooers;    Then well one more may fair Bianca have.    And so she shall. Lucentio shall make one,    Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
Why do you look on us and shake your head,And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,If that our noble father were alive?
Is the day so young?
I prithee now, lead the way without any more talking. Trinculo, the king and all our company else being drowned, we will inherit here.   Here, bear my bottle. Fellow Trinculo, well fill him by and by again.
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.
Trinculo, run into no further danger. Interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, Ill turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stockfish of thee.
Do not torment me, prithee. Ill bring my wood home faster.
My shame and guilt confounds me.    Forgive me, Valentine:   if hearty sorrow    Be a sufficient ransom for offence,    I tender 't here;   I do as truly suffer    As e'er I did commit.
Your shafts of fortune, though they hurt you mortally,Yet glance full wanderingly on us.
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd:    I do repent me;   read not my name there    My heart is not confederate with my hand.
Cassio, my lord, hath killed a young VenetianCalled Roderigo.
Primo, secundo, tertio is a good play, and the old saying is, the third pays for all.   The triplex, sir, is a good tripping measure, or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mindone, two, three.
Let it alone, thou fool. It is but trash.
Sir, heres the door. This is Lucentios house.My fathers bears more toward the marketplace.Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
How fares my noble lord?
Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster    Doth watch Biancas steps so narrowly,    'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage,    Which, once performed, let all the world say no,    Ill keep mine own despite of all the world.
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench.I love her ten times more than e'er I did. O, how I long to have some chat with her!
Well, I conceive.
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.
Ay, fool.
Have you thought onA place whereto you'll go?
Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius;    Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths:    Bid him repair to me, and bring with him    Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths;    Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are:    Tell him the emperor and the empress too    Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.    This do thou for my love; and so let him,    As he regards his aged father's life.
Here comes the lady. Oh, so light a foot    Will neer wear out the everlasting flint.    A lover may bestride the gossamers    That idles in the wanton summer air,    And yet not fall. So light is vanity.
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
How now, my dear Othello?Your dinner, and the generous islanders By you invited, do attend your presence.
Give ground, if you see him furious.
But jealous souls will not be answered so.    They are not ever jealous for the cause,    But jealous for theyre jealous.   It is a monster    Begot upon itself, born on itself.
You lie.
Oh, misery!
Your guest, then, madam:To be your prisoner should import offending;Which is for me less easy to commitThan you to punish.
As the moon does, by wanting light to give:But then renew I could not, like the moon;There were no suns to borrow of.
How now shall this be compassed?Canst thou bring me to th' party?
My lord?
O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook:This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
Whats the matter, dear?
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Here come our brothers.
This tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
Doubt not, my lord. Ill play the oratorAs if the golden fee for which I plead Were for myself. And so, my lord, adieu.
Where is that damnèd villain, Tranio,That faced and braved me in this matter so?
Dear lady
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
O, the gibbet-maker! he says that he hath takenthem down again, for the man must not be hanged tillthe next week.
No? Sayst me so, friend? What countryman?
[as LUCENTIO]  'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you.'Twill bring you gain or perish on the seas.
Excellent! Why, this is the best fooling when all is done.Now, a song.
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!
O thou Othello, thou was once so good,Fall'n in the practice of a cursèd slave,What shall be said to thee?
Despiteful tidings! O, unpleasing news!
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.
Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valor.   He is, indeed, sir, the most skillful, bloody, and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found inany part of Illyria.     Will you walk towards him? I will make your peace with him if I can.
Meantime God grants that we have need of you.    Our brother is imprisoned by your means,    Myself disgraced, and the nobility    Held in contempt, while great promotions    Are daily given to ennoble those    That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.
There's the fool hangs on your back already.
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!My husband say that she was false!
Go, go, up to the leads. The Lord Mayor knocks.
Pox on t! Ill not meddle with him.
I think it well, my lord.
Let him know't.
Thy brothers love, our duty, and thy faultsProvoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
I thank you, sir.
I will believe you by the syllableOf what you shall deliver. Yet, give me leave:How came you in these parts? where were you bred?
Your will be done:   this must my comfort be,    Sun that warms you here shall shine on me;    And those his golden beams to you here lent    Shall point on me and gild my banishment.
Even what it please my lord that shall become him.
Why, thou sayst true. It is a paltry cap,A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.I love thee well in that thou likst it not.
'Tis sure enough, an you knew how.    But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware:    The dam will wake; and, if she wind you once,    She's with the lion deeply still in league,    And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back,    And when he sleeps will she do what she list.    You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let it alone;    And, come, I will go get a leaf of brass,    And with a gad of steel will write these words,    And lay it by:   the angry northern wind    Will blow these sands, like Sibyl's leaves, abroad,    And where's your lesson, then?   Boy, what say you?
Thou didst speak but well    When most the truth; which I receive much better    Than to be pitied of thee.   Prithee, bring me    To the dead bodies of my queen and son:    One grave shall be for both: upon them shall    The causes of their death appear, unto    Our shame perpetual.   Once a day I'll visit    The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there    Shall be my recreation: so long as nature    Will bear up with this exercise, so long    I daily vow to use it.   Come and lead me    Unto these sorrows.
O, break, my heart, poor bankrupt, break at once!    To prison, eyes, neer look on liberty.    Vile earth, to earth resign. End motion here,    And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.
I am Christophero Sly. Call not me Honor nor Lordship.   I ne'er drank sack in my life. An if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef.   Ne'er ask me what raiment Ill wear, for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor nomore shoes than feet,   nay sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.
Come hither, boy; come, come, and learn of us    To melt in showers: thy grandsire loved thee well:    Many a time he danced thee on his knee,    Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow:    Many a matter hath he told to thee,    Meet and agreeing with thine infancy;    In that respect, then, like a loving child,    Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring,    Because kind nature doth require it so:    Friends should associate friends in grief and woe:    Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave;    Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.
Excellent! I smell a device.
Ill believe both    And what does else want credit, come to me,    And Ill be sworn tis true.   Travelers ne'er did lie,    Though fools at home condemn 'em.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you hadbut looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.
All men I hope live so.
I know not that, but such a handkerchiefI am sure it was your wifesdid I todaySee Cassio wipe his beard with.
Fetch t, let me see t.
Hush, my gentle neighbours!    Lend me your hands; to the next chamber bear her.    Get linen: now this matter must be look'd to,    For her relapse is mortal. Come, come;    And AEsculapius guide us!
I tell you, denied, my lord.
What would you have me do? go to the wars, would    you?   where a man may serve seven years for the loss    of a leg, and have not money enough in the end to    buy him a wooden one?
Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. But what talk I of this?   Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest.   Let their heads be slickly combed, their blue coats brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit.   Let them curtsy with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my masters horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?
Nay, come, Kate, come. You must not look so sour.
No, my profound heart. And yet, by the very fangs of malice I swear, I am not that I play. Are you the lady of the house?
With who?
Let us make the assay upon him: if he care notfor't, he will supply us easily; if he covetouslyreserve it, how shall's get it?
No.
Patience, I pray you! 'Twas a fault unwilling.
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,    Of the young prince your son.   Send straight for him.    Let him be crowned. In him your comfort lives.    Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edwards grave    And plant your joys in living Edwards throne.
[aside]  Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet;Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
Good night, good Captain Blunt.
I mean, an we be in choler, well draw.
Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.
[Within]  What ho, my liege! for God's sake,let me in.
What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
Beguiled, divorcèd, wrongèd, spited, slain!    Most detestable Death, by thee beguiled,    By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!    O love! O life! Not life, but love in death.
Trembled and shook, for why he stamped and swore    As if the vicar meant to cozen him.    But after many ceremonies done,    He calls for wine. A health! quoth he, as if    He had been aboard, carousing to his mates    After a storm;   quaffed off the muscatel    And threw the sops all in the sextons face,    Having no other reason    But that his beard grew thin and hungerly    And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking.    This done, he took the bride about the neck    And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack    That at the parting all the church did echo.    And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame,    And after me, I know, the rout is coming.    Such a mad marriage never was before.
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for you    I know you think to dine with me today    And have prepared great store of wedding cheer,    But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,    And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
But, my daughter,Say you the like to him?
This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.
He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby a bloody coxcomb too. For the love of God, your help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.
Torments will ope your lips.
What with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
Nay, thats not your way.
Come, come,Youll never meet a more sufficient man.
Lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue tothe history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so nearwith their lips that their breaths embraced together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo!   When these mutabilities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main exercise, th' incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me. I have brought you from Venice.Watch you tonight for the command, Ill lay t upon you. Cassio knows you not.   Ill not be far from you. Do you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which the time shall more favorably minister.
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!    He is not lolling on a lewd love bed,    But on his knees at meditation;    Not dallying with a brace of courtesans,    But meditating with two deep divines;    Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,    But praying, to enrich his watchful soul.    Happy were England would this virtuous prince    Take on his grave the sovereignty thereof.    But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.
Thou knowst the mask of night is on my face,    Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek    For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.    Fain would I dwell on form. Fain, fain deny    What I have spoke. But farewell compliment!    Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say ay,    And I will take thy word. Yet if thou swearst    Thou mayst prove false.   At lovers perjuries,    They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,    If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.    Or if thou thinkst I am too quickly won,    Ill frown and be perverse and say thee nay,    So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world.    In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,    And therefore thou mayst think my havior light.    But trust me, gentleman, Ill prove more true    Than those that have more coying to be strange.    I should have been more strange, I must confess,    But that thou overheardst, ere I was ware,    My true loves passion.   Therefore pardon me,    And not impute this yielding to light love,    Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Come, my gracious lord,Shall I be your playfellow?
O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy   !    O loyal father of a treacherous son!    Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,    From when this stream through muddy passages    Hath held his current and defiled himself!    Thy overflow of good converts to bad,    And thy abundant goodness shall excuse    This deadly blot in thy digressing son.
An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.
Well, what was yours?
Nay, yet theres more in this.    I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings,    As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts    The worst of words.
Talk not to me, for Ill not speak a word.Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
They give this greeting to the citadel.This likewise is a friend.
I do not like the office.    But, sith I am entered in this cause so far,    Pricked to t by foolish honesty and love,    I will go on.   I lay with Cassio lately    And, being troubled with a raging tooth,    I could not sleep. There are a kind of men    So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter    Their affairs.   One of this kind is Cassio.    In sleep I heard him say Sweet Desdemona,    Let us be wary, let us hide our loves.    And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,    Cry O sweet creature! and then kiss me hard,    As if he plucked up kisses by the roots    That grew upon my lips,   lay his leg    Over my thigh, and sigh, and kiss, and then    Cry Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,Or how stolen from the dead.
All to you. Lights, more lights!
Ill after him, and see the event of this.
What mean'st thou, Aaron? wherefore didst thou this?
Ha!
Call'st thou that harm?
Not a hair perished.    On their sustaining garments not a blemish,    But fresher than before.   And, as thou badest me,    In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.    The kings son have I landed by himself,    Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs    In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,    His arms in this sad knot.
Descend, and keep your words.
Oh, twas a din to fright a monsters ear,    To make an earthquake!   Sure, it was the roar    Of a whole herd of lions.
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;    Here cousin:    On this side my hand, and on that side yours.    Now is this golden crown like a deep well    That owes two buckets, filling one another,    The emptier ever dancing in the air,    The other down, unseen and full of water:    That bucket down and full of tears am I,    Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
There!
Blistered be thy tongue    For such a wish! He was not born to shame.    Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,    For tis a throne where honor may be crowned.    Sole monarch of the universal earth,    Oh, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong    To strive for that which resteth in my choice.    I am no breeching scholar in the schools.    Ill not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times    But learn my lessons as I please myself.    And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down.    [To HORTENSIO]    Take you your instrument, play you the whiles.    His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
An t be any way, it must be with valor, for policy I hate. I had as lief be a Brownist as a politician.
Gods wrong is most of all.    If thou didst fear to break an oath by Him,    The unity the king my husband made    Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.    If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him,    Th' imperial metal circling now thy head    Had graced the tender temples of my child,    And both the princes had been breathing here,    Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,    Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.    What canst thou swear by now?
Fie, that youll say so! He plays o' the viol-de-gamboys,   and speaks three or four languages wordfor word without book,   and hath all the good gifts of nature.
(  aside  )  What relish is in this? How runs the stream?    Or I am mad, or else this is a dream.    Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep.    If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
I'll tell you more anon. Here's a noble feast toward.
Why dost thou spit at me?
I am not mad, Sir Topas. I say to you this house is dark.
Never, my lord. Therefore prepare to die.
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days    Which here you urge to prove us enemies,    We followed then our lord, our sovereign king.    So should we you, if you should be our king.
She says your Worship means to make a puppet of her.
Now heres another discontented paper    Found in his pocket too, and this,   it seems,    Roderigo meant to have sent this damnèd villain    But that, belike, Iago in the interim    Came in and satisfied him.
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.    But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,    To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,    And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover    What power the Duke of York had levied there;    Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.
True, madam. And, to comfort you with chance,    Assure yourself, after our ship did split,    When you and those poor number saved with you    Hung on our driving boat,   I saw your brother,    Most provident in peril, bind himself,    Courage and hope both teaching him the practice,    To a strong mast that lived upon the sea,    Where, like Arion on the dolphins back,    I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves    So long as I could see.
(to IAGO)     O Spartan dog,    More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,    Look on the tragic loading of this bed.    This is thy work. The object poisons sight,    Let it be hid.   Gratiano, keep the house    And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,    For they succeed on you.   T   o you, lord governor,    Remains the censure of this hellish villain:    The time, the place, the torture. Oh, enforce it!    Myself will straight aboard, and to the state    This heavy act with heavy heart relate.
Bushy, what news?
But he will not entreat his son for us.
Are you three usurers' men?
Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.
Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life.
Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone.Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice!Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend!
Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,Here Aaron is; and what with Aaron now?
Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.Let's see your piece.
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long.I will deliver you or else lie for you.Meantime, have patience.
What you can make her do,I am content to look on: what to speak,I am content to hear; for 'tis as easyTo make her speak as move.
Why, anything. An honorable murderer, if you will,For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.
Urge neither charity nor shame to me.     [addressing the others]     Uncharitably with me have you dealt,    And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered.    My charity is outrage, life my shame,    And in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.
I mock you not, by heaven.Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.    I have been long a sleeper; but I trust    My absence doth neglect no great design    Which by my presence might have been concluded.
My lord.
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I havea kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, orany thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;that kills my heart.
My gracious lord,
These words become your lips as they passthorough them.
As if that name,    Shot from the deadly level of a gun,    Did murder her, as that names cursed hand    Murdered her kinsman.   O, tell me, Friar, tell me,    In what vile part of this anatomy    Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack    The hateful mansion.   [He draws his dagger]
[as LUCENTIO]   Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman.   Why, sir, what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father I am able to maintain it.
Bear with me, I am hungry for revenge,    And now I cloy me with beholding it.    Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward,    Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;    Young York, he is but boot, because both they    Matched not the high perfection of my loss.    Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward,    And the beholders of this frantic play,    Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,    Untimely smothered in their dusky graves.    Richard yet lives, hells black intelligencer,    Only reserved their factor to buy souls    And send them thither.   But at hand, at hand    Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.    Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray,    To have him suddenly conveyed from hence.    Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,    That I may live to say, The dog is dead.
A thousand pieces!
Why, boy, how is it?
Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more thanmy pack will hold.
Upon the stroke of four.
Come, sermon me no further:    No villanous bounty yet hath pass'd my heart;    Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.    Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack,    To think I shall lack friends?   Secure thy heart;    If I would broach the vessels of my love,    And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,    Men and men's fortunes could I frankly use    As I can bid thee speak.
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant? The goodness of the night upon you, friends!What is the news?
But did you ever tell him she was false?
What became of his bark and his followers?
Therefore, my lord, it highly us concerns    By day and night to attend him carefully,    And feed his humour kindly as we may,    Till time beget some careful remedy.
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
That sort was well fished for.
No, by this heavenly light!
The sooner, sweet, for you.
Look, how this ring encompasseth finger;    Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart.    Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.    And if thy poor devoted servant may    But beg one favor at thy gracious hand,    Thou dost confirm his happiness forever.
[to RIVERS]  Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Good, Peter, to hide her face, for her fans the fairerface.
If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.Diana, aid my purpose!
'Twould be too tedious to repeat;But the main grief springs from the lossOf a beloved daughter and a wife.
Sir, I have not you by the hand.
Go you, Malvolio. If it be a suit from the count, I am sick, or not at home.   What you will, to dismiss it.
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justiceProve violence; in the which three great ones suffer,Yourself, your queen, your son.
You were kneeled to and importuned otherwise    By all of us, and the fair soul herself    Weighed between loathness and obedience, at    Which end o' th' beam should bow.   We have lost your son,    I fear, forever. Milan and Naples have    More widows in them of this business' making    Than we bring men to comfort them.    The faults your own.
Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding    Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself    And you of her,   the bloody book of law    You shall yourself read in the bitter letter,    After your own sense, yea, though our proper son    Stood in your action.
Work you, then.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
And he that hath commanded is our king.
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:The odds for high and low's alike.
Up.
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me.    Neither my place nor aught I heard of business    Hath raised me from my bed,   nor doth the general care    Take hold on me, for my particular grief    Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature    That it engluts and swallows other sorrows    And it is still itself.
But didst thou see them dead?
Good Mistress Mary Accost
Ay, but this answer will not serve.
So dear I loved the man that I must weep.    I took him for the plainest harmless creature    That breathed upon this earth a Christian;    Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded    The history of all her secret thoughts.    So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue    That, his apparent open guilt omitted    I mean his conversation with Shores wife    He lived from all attainder of suspects.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.    The curfew bell hath rung. Tis three oclock.    Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.    Spare not for the cost.
My legs can keep no measure in delight,    When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:    Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.
Vent my folly? He has heard that word of some great man and now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly!     I am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a cockney.   I prithee now, ungird thy strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to my lady. Shall I vent to her that thou art coming?
And let them die that age and sullens have;For both hast thou, and both become the grave.
Be it so, then:    Yet none does know, but you, how she came dead,    Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.    She did disdain my child, and stood between    Her and her fortunes: none would look on her,    But cast their gazes on Marina's face;    Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin    Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through;    And though you call my course unnatural,    You not your child well loving, yet I find    It greets me as an enterprise of kindness    Perform'd to your sole daughter.
Thou weepest to make them drink, Timon.
Thou know'st I do: I call'd thee by thy name.
But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy billow kissthe moon, I care not.
Therefore, Timon,
If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before my lady.   He will come to her in yellow stockings, and tis a color she abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests.   And he will smileupon her, which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a melancholy as she i   s, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt. If you will see it, follow me.
Look to the lady; O, she's but o'erjoy'd.    Early in blustering morn this lady was    Thrown upon this shore.   I oped the coffin,    Found there rich jewels; recover'd her, and placed her    Here in Diana's temple.
Ay, tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a dun-colored stock. Shall we set about some revels?
[To LUCILIUS]  Love you the maid?
And till the tears that she hath shed for theeLike envious floods o'errun her lovely face,She was the fairest creature in the world And yet she is inferior to none.
One of these is true:I think affliction may subdue the cheek,But not take in the mind.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
O, you give me ill counsel.
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen.
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,    Be you beneath the sky.    [Aside]   I am angling now,    Though you perceive me not how I give line.    Go to, go to!    How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!    And arms her with the boldness of a wife    To her allowing husband!    [Exeunt POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and Attendants]    Gone already!    Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and    ears a fork'd one!    Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I    Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue    Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour    Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.    There have been,    Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;    And many a man there is, even at this present,    Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,    That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence    And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by    Sir Smile, his neighbour:   nay, there's comfort in't    Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,    As mine, against their will. Should all despair    That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind    Would hang themselves.   Physic for't there is none;    It is a bawdy planet, that will strike    Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,    From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,    No barricado for a belly; know't;    It will let in and out the enemy    With bag and baggage: many thousand on's    Have the disease, and feel't not.   How now, boy!
My lord, your promise for the earldom
No, nor look'd on us.
How dost thou feel thyself now?
Content. Whats the wager?
Sir, a word ere you go. Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
Monday! Ha, ha. Well, Wednesday is too soon,    O Thursday let it be.O Thursday, tell her,    She shall be married to this noble earl.    Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?    Well keep no great ado, a friend or two.    For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,    It may be thought we held him carelessly,    Being our kinsman, if we revel much.    Therefore well have some half a dozen friends,    And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.    What, did he marry me to famish me?    Beggars that come unto my fathers door    Upon entreaty have a present alms.    If not, elsewhere they meet with charity.    But I, who never knew how to entreat,    Nor never needed that I should entreat,    Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,    With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed.    And that which spites me more than all these wants,    He does it under name of perfect love,    As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,    'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.    I prithee, go and get me some repast,    I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
'Save his majesty!
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for oursheep-shearing.
I do assure thee, father, so it is.
I' th' commonwealth I would by contraries    Execute all things. For no kind of traffic    Would I admit. No name of magistrate.    Letters should not be known. Riches, poverty,    And use of servicenone. Contract, succession,    Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyardnone.    No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil.    No occupation. All men idle, all.    And women too, but innocent and pure.    No sovereignty
With mine officer!
The town is empty. On the brow o' th' sea Stand ranks of people, and they cry A sail!
Be one of those that think    The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence,    And open this to Pericles.   I do shame    To think of what a noble strain you are,    And of how coward a spirit.
You have, my lord. Would it might please your Grace, On our entreaties, to amend your fault.
Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry    But twas thy beauty that provokèd me.    Nay, now dispatch; twas I that stabbed young Edward    But twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her.
I must obey.    (t      o    VIOLA     )    This comes with seeking you:    But theres no remedy. I shall answer it  .  What will you do, now my necessity    Makes me to ask you for my purse?   It grieves me    Much more for what I cannot do for you    Than what befalls myself.   You stand amazed,    But be of comfort.
You or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. I tell you what you shall do. Our generals wife is now the general. I may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and graces.   Confess yourself freely to her, importune her help to put you inyour place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested.   This broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming,this crack of your love shall grow stronger than it wasbefore.
Certain: Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and    Timandra had gold of him:   he likewise enriched poor    straggling soldiers with great quantity: 'tis said    he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.
Katherine, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
Carry his water to the wisewoman.
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, lets go.
Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
E'en as Apemantus does now; hate a lord with my heart.
A good note, that keeps you from the blow of the law.
A messenger from the galleys.
Return them, we are ready; and our daughter,    In honour of whose birth these triumphs are,    Sits here, like beauty's child, whom nature gat    For men to see, and seeing wonder at.
Et vous aussi. Votre serviteur!
What is the fourth?
Do not deny to him that you love me.
It becomes thy oath full well,Thou to me thy secrets tell.
We wait upon your Grace.
No, as I am a Christian.    If to preserve this vessel for my lord    From any other foul unlawful touch    Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
Say that I did all this for love of her.
Her natural posture!    Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed    Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she    In thy not chiding, for she was as tender    As infancy and grace.   But yet, Paulina,    Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing    So aged as this seems.
Past question, for thou seest it will not curl by nature.
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thoushalt hear; 'tis in three parts.
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
I thank you. Here comes the count.
Some achieve greatness
Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury. Thou art on thy deathbed.
Well, well, he was the covertst sheltered traitor Thatever lived.     [to the MAYOR]    Would you imagine, or almost believe,    Were t not that by great preservation    We live to tell it,   that subtle traitor    This day had plotted, in the council house    To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?
Heaven keep the monster from Othellos mind!
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
[to STEPHANO]  Lo, lo, again! Bite him to death, I prithee.
No.
I am Pericles of Tyre: but tell me now    My drown'd queen's name, as in the rest you said    Thou hast been godlike perfect,    The heir of kingdoms and another like    To Pericles thy father.
A hornèd mans a monster and a beast.
Go to my steward.
He hath not told us of the captain yet.    When that is known and golden time convents,    A solemn combination shall be made    Of our dear souls.   Meantime, sweet sister,    We will not part from hence.   Cesario, come,    For so you shall be, while you are a man.    But when in other habits you are seen,    Orsinos mistress and his fancys queen.
(sings) O no, no, no, no, you dare not.
He did not call, hes busy in the paper.Is there division twixt my lord and Cassio?
Ay, past all surgery.
The Mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear;    Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit.    And look you get a prayer book in your hand    And stand between two churchmen, good my lord,    For on that ground Ill make a holy descant  .  And be not easily won to our requests.    Play the maids part: still answer nay, and take it.
You have often    Begun to tell me what I am,   but stopped    And left me to a bootless inquisition,    Concluding, Stay. Not yet.
In thy foul throat thou liest.   Queen Margaret saw    Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood,    The which thou once didst bend against her breast,    But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
Hark, now I hear them.
And only in that safety died her brothers.
South-west.
No, not these twenty years.
Me too, let me go thither.
What, are you both agreed?
That's a deed thou'lt die for.
Will you enforce me to a world of cares?    Call them again.   I am not made of stones,    But penetrable to your kind entreaties,    Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
I'll look you out a good turn, Servilius.
[within]  My lord , my lord! What, ho! My lord, my lord!
Well, I must leave her company.
Upon my soul,'tis true, sir.
Within this half hour will he be asleep. Wilt thou destroy him then?
Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys,    Who would believe that there were mountaineers    Dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em    Wallets of flesh,   or that there were such men    Whose heads stood in their breasts?which now we find    Each putter-out of five for one will bring us    Good warrant of.
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw thesesights: the men are not yet cold under water, northe bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at itnow.
Oh, widow Dido? Ay, widow Dido.
Commend me to thy lady.
No remedy.Have you done there?
My lord Sebastian,    The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness    And time to speak it in.   You rub the sore    When you should bring the plaster.
And for I know she taketh most delight    In music, instruments, and poetry,    Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,    Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,    Or, Signior Gremio, you know any such,    Prefer them hither,   for to cunning men    I will be very kind, and liberal    To mine own children in good bringing up.   And so farewell.Katherina, you may stay,For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Why, do 'e take it, and the gods give thee good on't!
I will, my lord.
(aside]   Oh, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful    In the contempt and anger of his lip!    A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon    Than love that would seem hid. Loves night is noon.    [To   VIOLA]   Cesario, by the roses of the spring,    By maidhood, honor, truth, and everything,    I love thee so,   that, maugre all thy pride,    Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.    Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,    For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause,    But rather reason thus with reason fetter.    Love sought is good, but given unsought better.
No, indeed, my lord.
Blue, my lord.
You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
Oh, fie upon thee, strumpet!
I confess two sleeves.
What a blow was there given!
O my liege,    Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased    Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.    Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands    The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?    Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?    Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?    Did not the one deserve to have an heir?    Is not his heir a well-deserving son?    Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time    His charters and his customary rights;    Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;    Be not thyself; for how art thou a king    But by fair sequence and succession?    Now, afore GodGod forbid I say true!    If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,    Call in the letters patent that he hath    By his attorneys-general to sue    His livery, and deny his offer'd homage,    You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,    You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts    And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts    Which honour and allegiance cannot think.
No?Here comes my daughter, she can witness it.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
[aside]  Peace, sirrah.
Thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.
[To MARINA]  First, I would have you note, this isan honourable man.
Why, in good time.
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonightHave my old feet stumbled at graves!Whos there?
[as LUCENTIO]   If it be so, sir, that you are the man    Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest,    And if you break the ice and do this feat,    Achieve the elder, set the younger free    For our access,   whose hap shall be to have her    Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
See, where he comes. So please you, step aside.Ill know his grievance or be much denied.
So could I too.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort    Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly    And prays the Moor be safe.   For they were parted    With foul and violent tempest.
Get you hence, for I must goWhere it fits not you to know.
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.    I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king;    Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:    Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove    A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
Very foul.
Here, kiss the book. Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a goose.
[To SIR TOBY BELCH]  No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.
Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremasterand a knave; which not-withstanding, thou shalt beno less esteemed.
God be with you. I have done.    Please it your grace, on to the state affairs.    I had rather to adopt a child than get it.    Come hither, Moor.    I here do give thee that with all my heart    Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart    I would keep from thee.   For your sake, jewel,    I am glad at soul I have no other child.    For thy escape would teach me tyranny,    To hang clogs on them.   I have done, my lord.
I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.
Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of entertainment.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords.Heres my fiddlestick. Heres that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
Sir, my liege,    Do not infest your mind with beating on    The strangeness of this business.   At picked leisure    Which shall be shortly, single Ill resolve you    Which to you shall seem probableof every    These happened accidents.   Till when, be cheerful    And think of each thing well.     [aside to ARIEL]    Come hither, spirit.    Set Caliban and his companions free.    Untie the spell.
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot    Which ne'er I did remember:   to my knowledge,    I never in my life did look on him.
Oh, bloody period!
[To VIOLA and attendants]    Stand you a while aloof.   [To VIOLA]   Cesario,    Thou knowst no less but all. I have unclasped    To thee the book even of my secret soul.    Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her;    Be not denied access, stand at her doors,    And tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow    Till thou have audience.
My friend is dead,'Tis done at your request. But let her live.
Welcome, my gracious lord; welcome, dread queen;    Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius;    And welcome, all: although the cheer be poor,    'Twill fill your stomachs; please you eat of it.
Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.
Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?
My lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.
I am bound to your niece, sir. I mean, she is the list of my voyage.
Have I, Malvolio? No.
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I amfalse of heart that way; and that he knew, I warranthim.
An if I be, sir, is it any offense?
No, good sir;He has his health and ampler strength indeedThan most have of his age.
Look you, here comes my mistress' page.
Here, my good lord.
How now, Lord Stanley, whats the news?
Oh, monstrous! Monstrous!
She is spread of lateInto a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,    That they which brought me in my masters hate,    I live to look upon their tragedy.    Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older    Ill send some packing that yet think not on t.
O Dionyza,    Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it,    Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?    Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep    Our woes into the air; our eyes do weep,    Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder;    That, if heaven slumber while their creatures want,    They may awake their helps to comfort them.    I'll then discourse our woes, felt several years,    And wanting breath to speak help me with tears.
Holla! Stand there!
Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
As you have said, my lord.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Is he come?
Good night, honest Iago.
Then I repent not.
Thats fouler.
Carlisle, this is your doom:    Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,    More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;    So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:    For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,    High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.
I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?
What, art thou waking?
Why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the clerestories toward the south-north are as lustrous as ebony.   And yet complainest thou of obstruction?
If? Thou protector of this damnèd strumpet,    Talkst thou to me of ifs? Thou art a traitor    Off with his head. Now by Saint Paul I swear    I will not dine until I see the same.    Lovell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done.    The rest that love me, rise and follow me.
I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray nowWhat colour are your eyebrows?
(  aside  ) Oh, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!
How, my lord!What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?
O Helicanus, strike me, honour'd sir;    Give me a gash, put me to present pain;    Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me    O'erbear the shores of my mortality,    And drown me with their sweetness   .   O, come hither,    Thou that beget'st him that did thee beget;    Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus,    And found at sea again!   O Helicanus,    Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud    As thunder threatens us: this is Marina.    What was thy mother's name? tell me but that,    For truth can never be confirm'd enough,    Though doubts did ever sleep.
I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrament, but nothing of the circumstance more.
Long live she so. And long live you to think so.
By thy approach thou makest me most unhappy.
And, for that dowry, Ill assure her of    Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,    In all my lands and leases whatsoever.    Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,    That covenants may be kept on either hand.
Of very ill manner. Hell speak with you, will you or no.
Come, Montague, for thou art early upTo see thy son and heir now early down.
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.
Roderigo!
My mother was the daughter of a king;    Who died the minute I was born,    As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft    Deliver'd weeping.
Oh, fie upon them! Some such squire he was That turned your wit the seamy side withoutAnd made you to suspect me with the Moor.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil.    The gravity and stillness of your youth    The world hath noted, and your name is great    In mouths of wisest censure.   Whats the matter    That you unlace your reputation thus    And spend your rich opinion for the name    Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
(t      o    VIOLA     )    Theres no remedy, sir; he will fight with you for s oath sake.   Marry, he hath better bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of.   Therefore, draw for the supportance ofhis vow. He protests he will not hurt you.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynards Castle,Where you shall find me well accompaniedWith reverend fathers and well-learnèd bishops.
Stop there, stop there.
Nay, I'll be patient.Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me,To call thyself Marina.
Who calls so loud?
A more satiety of commendations.If I should pay you for't as 'tis extoll'd,It would unclew me quite.
No, noble mistress. 'Tis fresh morning with me    When you are by at night. I do beseech you    Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers    What is your name?
Half-part, mates, half-part.Come, let's have her aboard suddenly.
It is a pretty mocking of the life.Here is a touch; is't good?
(  t    o  VIOLA   )   Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love,    In the sweet pangs of it remember me;    For such as I am, all true lovers are,    Unstaid and skittish in all motions else    Save in the constant image of the creature    That is beloved.   How dost thou like this tune?
I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine woman! A fair woman! A sweet woman!
So prosper I as I swear perfect love.
Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
Where is the king?
Hearst thou, Biondello?
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,    That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have    Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought    The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd    Of great Apollo's priest;   and that, since then,    You have not dared to break the holy seal    Nor read the secrets in't.
I would you had been by the ship side, to havehelped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.
I'll show you how to observe a strange event.Your lord sends now for money.
Here he comes with your niece. Give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.
(  aside  ) 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue!
Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
No, as I shall be saved.
Grandam, we can, for my good uncle Gloucester    Told me the king, provoked to it by the queen,    Devised impeachments to imprison him;    And when my uncle told me so, he wept,    And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek,    Bade me rely on him as on my father,    And he would love me dearly as a child.
Go, take it up unto thy masters use.
Is t come to this?
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
Your bidding shall I do effectually.
Good morrow, Father.
The Lord protect him from that kingly title! Hath he set bounds between their love and me?I am their mother. Who shall bar me from them?
Faith, he is gone unto the taming school.
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
Every man here's so. What would he have borrowed ofyou?
May it please your honour, my lord hath sent
I had forgot theeOh, come in, Emilia.Soft, by and by. Let me the curtains draw.Where art thou?
These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes;    And they have seized Marina. Let her go:    There's no hope she will return.   I'll swear    she's dead,    And thrown into the sea. But I'll see further:    Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her,    Not carry her aboard. If she remain,    Whom they have ravish'd must by me be slain.
Attends he here, or no? Lucilius!
Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune,    And will awake him from his melancholy.    Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,    And waste the time, which looks for other revels.    Even in your armours, as you are address'd,    Will very well become a soldier's dance.    I will not have excuse, with saying this    Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads,    Since they love men in arms as well as beds.
How's this? how's this? Some more; be sage.
Should I now meet my father,He would not call me son.
Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?
O my poor father!The heaven sets spies upon us, will not haveOur contract celebrated.
[To STEPHANO]  Ill swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject, for the liquor is not earthly.
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:    I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,    Because my power is weak and all ill left:    But if I could, by Him that gave me life,    I would attach you all and make you stoop    Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;    But since I cannot, be it known to you    I do remain as neuter.   So, fare you well;    Unless you please to enter in the castle    And there repose you for this night.
Yet pause awhile:    Yon knight doth sit too melancholy,    As if the entertainment in our court    Had not a show might countervail his worth.    Note it not you, Thaisa?
Shrouded in cloth of state; balm'd and entreasured    With full bags of spices! A passport too!    Apollo, perfect me in the characters!     [Reading from a scroll]     'Here I give to understand,    If e'er this coffin drive a-land,    I, King Pericles, have lost    This queen, worth all our mundane cost.    Who finds her, give her burying;    She was the daughter of a king:    Besides this treasure for a fee,    The gods requite his charity!'    If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart    That even cracks for woe! This chanced tonight.
Why do the emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
Ay, that I will. And Ill be wise hereafter    And seek for grace.   What a thrice-double ass    Was I, to take this drunkard for a god    And worship this dull fool!
Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.    Why should you want?   Behold, the earth hath roots;    Within this mile break forth a hundred springs;    The oaks bear mast, the briers scarlet hips;    The bounteous housewife, nature, on each bush    Lays her full mess before you. Want! why want?
Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see:if you like her, so; if not, I have lost my earnest.
[to STEPHANO]  Ill show thee every fertile inch o' th' island.And I will kiss thy foot. I prithee, be my god.
[to ANNE]  Come, madam, come. I in all haste was sent.
I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant: my    mistress is one, and I am her fool.   When men come    to borrow of your masters, they approach sadly, and    go away merry; but they enter my mistress' house    merrily, and go away sadly: the reason of this?
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.
Pardon, dear father.
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio,This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not.Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.
[to ANTONIO]  One. Tell.
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy    and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to    him, though removed fifty times, shall all come    under the hangman:   which though it be great pity,    yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a    ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into    grace!   Some say he shall be stoned; but that death    is too soft for him, say I draw our throne into a    sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
Then never trust me if I be afeard.
Hidst thou that forehead with a golden crown    Where should be branded, if that right were right,    The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown    And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?    Tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?
And mine, with my heart in t. And now farewellTill half an hour hence.
Why, may one ask?
Indeed, my lord,If I had thought the sight of my poor imageWould thus have wrought you,for the stone is mineI'ld not have show'd it.
A picture, sir. When comes your book forth?
His bark is stoutly timbered and his pilot    Of very expert and approved allowance    Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,    Stand in bold cure.
You must away tonight.
Marry, sir, half a day's journey: and I'll tell    you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is her    birth-day;   and there are princes and knights come    from all parts of the world to just and tourney for herlove.
A parlous boy! Go to, you are too shrewd.
'Sblood, but youll not hear me!  If ever I did dream of such a matter, abhor me.
Catesby.
To have no screen between this part he played    And him he played it for, he needs will be    Absolute Milan.   Me, poor man, my library    Was dukedom large enough.   Of temporal royalties    He thinks me now incapable, confederates    So dry he was for swaywi' th' King of Naples    To give him annual tribute, do him homage,    Subject his coronet to his crown and bend    The dukedom yet unbowed   alas, poor Milan!    To most ignoble stooping.
He loves you well that holds his life of you.
Canst thou catch any fishes, then?
Marshal, demand of yonder champion    The cause of his arrival here in arms:    Ask him his name and orderly proceed    To swear him in the justice of his cause.
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in sopreposterous estate as we are.
Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, weshould lodge them with this sign.
So longest way shall have the longest moans.
Certainly, sir, I can.
O, thou well-skilled in curses, stay awhile,And teach me how to curse mine enemies.
Went he hence now?
What is that?
So she does any thing; though I report it,That should be silent: if young DoriclesDo light upon her, she shall bring him thatWhich he not dreams of.
Alack, my lord, what do you mean by that?
Go to, farewell.Do you hear, Roderigo?
The devil a puritan that he is, or anything constantly,but a time-pleaser;   an affectioned ass that cons state without book and utters it by great swarths;   the best persuaded of himself, so crammed, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith that all that look on him love him.   And on that vice in him will my revenge find notable cause to work.
This is Illyria, lady.
Performance shall follow.
[giving money to the   FOOL   ]   Theres a testril of me too. If one knight give a
'Tis such another fitchew. Marry, a perfumed one.What do you mean by this haunting of me?
No, pray thee.     [aside]    I must obey. His art is of such power,    It would control my dams god, Setebos,    And make a vassal of him.
Why, how now, general? No more of that.
Alas, he is betrayed and I undone.
I know they do, and I have well deserved it.
Though this island seem to be desert
I'll hunt with him; and let them be received,Not without fair reward.
It may be so; but yet my inward soul    Persuades me it is otherwise:   howe'er it be,    I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad    As, though on thinking on no thought I think,    Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
My lord, your son was gone before I came.
O you gods!    Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,    And snatch them straight away?   We here below    Recall not what we give, and therein may    Use honour with you.
[as VINCENTIO]  Thou liest. His father is come from Padua and here looking out at the window.
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
My prayers, minx?
Let me have open means to come to them,And soon Ill rid you from the fear of them.
Have you forgot me, sir?
Go.
I longTo hear the story of your life, which mustTake the ear strangely.
Farewell!I will omit no opportunityThat may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
We talk here in the public haunt of men.    Either withdraw unto some private place,    And reason coldly of your grievances,    Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
No doubt, my lord.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,    Herself poised with herself in either eye.    But in that crystal scales let there be weighed    Your ladys love against some other maid    That I will show you shining at the feast,    And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
Alas, alas!    It is not honesty in me to speak    What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,    And his own courses will denote him so    That I may save my speech. Do but go after    And mark how he continues.
By his command    Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him    Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,    Can send his brother:   and, but infirmity    Which waits upon worn times hath something seized    His wish'd ability, he had himself    The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his    Measured to look upon you;   whom he loves    He bade me say somore than all the sceptres    And those that bear them living.
Whate'er it be,    'Tis wondrous heavy.   Wrench it open straight:    If the sea's stomach be o'ercharged with gold,    'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.
Ill fetch them, sir.
I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
O, she's warm! If this be magic, let it be an artLawful as eating.
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.
There is no more but so. Say it is done,And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
Heavens forgive it!
My words are dull. O, quicken them with thine!
Thy life answer!
'   Twill out, twill out.I peace?    No, I will speak as liberal as the north.    Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,    All, all cry shame against me, yet Ill speak.
How! not women?
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
Amen.
Whe'er thou beest he or no,    Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me,    As late I have been, I not know.   Thy pulse    Beats as of flesh and blood. And since I saw thee,    Th' affliction of my mind amends, with which    I fear a madness held me.   This must crave    An if this be at alla most strange story.    Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat    Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero    Be living and be here?
Not I, my lord.
Oh, hes drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone. His eyes were set at eight i' the morning.
[aside]   O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him.   How he jets under his advanced plumes!
Withdraw, my lord. Ill help you to a horse.
Twenty crowns.
Why, I cannot name't but I shall offend.
Thou chidst me oft for loving Rosaline.
What says your Highness to my just request?
Take him up gently, and to bed with him,And each one to his office when he wakes.
Now will not I deliver his letter, for the behavior of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacityand breeding. His employment between his lord and my niece confirms no less. Therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth.   He will find it comes from a clodpole. But, sir, I willdeliver his challenge by word of mouth, set upon Aguecheek a notable report of valor, and drive the gentleman (as I know his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity.   This will so fright them both that theywill kill one another by the look, like cockatrices.
O, sir, I can be modest.
I ne'er saw this before.Sure, theres some wonder in this handkerchief,I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
He smiled and said The better for our purpose.
Dieu vous garde, monsieur.
Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown.He sees thee not.
For mine own part,    I never tasted Timon in my life,    Nor came any of his bounties over me,    To mark me for his friend;   yet, I protest,    For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue    And honourable carriage,    Had his necessity made use of me,    I would have put my wealth into donation,    And the best half should have return'd to him,    So much I love his heart: but, I perceive,    Men must learn now with pity to dispense;    For policy sits above conscience.
Be't not in thy care; go,I charge thee, invite them all: let in the tideOf knaves once more; my cook and I'll provide.
If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.
Tush, I will stir about,    And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.    Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.    I'll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.    I'll play the housewife for this once.
And what should I do in Illyria?    My brother he is in Elysium.    Perchance he is not drownd.What think you, sailors?
Tis the way    To call hers exquisite, in question more.    These happy masks that kiss fair ladies brows,    Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.    He that is strucken blind cannot forget    The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.    Show me a mistress that is passing fair;    What doth her beauty serve but as a note    Where I may read who passed that passing fair?    Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Pray you, walk near: I'll speak with you anon.
How do you? What's the news?
What will you do with t, that you have been so earnestTo have me filch it?
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes    I see thy grieved heart:   thy sad aspect    Hath from the number of his banish'd years    Pluck'd four away.
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,    With that which he hath drunk tonight already,    Hell be as full of quarrel and offense    As my young mistress' dog.   Now my sick fool Roderigo,    Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out,    To Desdemona hath tonight caroused    Potations pottle-deep, and hes to watch.    Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits    (That hold their honors in a wary distance,    The very elements of this warlike isle)    Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups,    And they watch too.   Now mongst this flock of drunkards    Am I to put our Cassio in some action    That may offend the isle.   But here they come.    If consequence do but approve my dream    My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
Noble Sebastian,Thou letst thy fortune sleepdie, ratherwinkstWhiles thou art waking.
[as LUCENTIO]   Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.    Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,    Whatever fortune stays him from his word:    Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;    Though he be merry, yet withal hes honest.
A prize, a prize, a prize!
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,To mend her kissing with!
Soldiers, not thieves.
Thats not amiss, But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
Celestial Dian, goddess argentine,I will obey thee. Helicanus!
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Oh, heaven! Oh, heavenly powers!
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight:    Bid him repair to us to Ely House    To see this business.   To-morrow next    We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow:    And we create, in absence of ourself,    Our uncle York lord governor of England;    For he is just and always loved us well.    Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;    Be merry, for our time of stay is short.
How canst thou woo her?
Get me some poison, Iago, this night. Ill not expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovidemy mind againThis night, Iago!
What should it be, that they shriek so abroad?
Thou hast undone our mother.
[To DESDEMONA]  I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this,Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
As many, worthy lady, to yourself:    According to your ladyship's impose,    I am thus early come to know what service    It is your pleasure to command me in.
Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears:    Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing    The close enacts and counsels of the heart!    Here's a young lad framed of another leer:    Look, how the black slave smiles upon the father,    As who should say 'Old lad, I am thine own.'    He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed    Of that self-blood that first gave life to you,    And from that womb where you imprison'd were    He is enfranchised and come to light:    Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,    Although my seal be stamped in his face.
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.
We'll bring your grace e'en to the edge o' the shore,Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune andThe gentlest winds of heaven.
Do you hear, Cassio?
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
But how long shall that title ever last?
As you shall prove us, praise us.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment.    I do not so secure me in the error,    But the main article I do approve    In fearful sense.
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London    The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,    Two of the dangerous consorted traitors    That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.
[Aside]  Is she a Capulet?O dear account! My life is my foes debt.
Here, here, sir! Here, sir!
Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal emperor!
Yes, my good lord,    It doth contain a king; King Richard lies    Within the limits of yon lime and stone:    And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,    Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman    Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.
A boy?
But I'ld say he had not,And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,Howe'er you lean to the nayward.
After my death, the one half of my lands, And, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
Certain, men should be what they seem.
None!The music of the spheres! List, my Marina.
I go, my lord.
I am thinking what I shall say I have provided for    him: it must be a personating of himself;   a satire    against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery    of the infinite flatteries that follow youth and opulency.
Yea, say you so?There shall not at your father's house theseseven yearsBe born another such.
He is as disproportioned in his manners    As in his shape.    [to CALIBAN]    Go, sirrah, to my cell.    Take with you your companions.   As you look    To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.
Then give me leave to go.
[to GONZALO]    My master through his art foresees the danger    That you, his friend, are, and sends me forth    For else his project diesto keep them living.     [sings in GONZALOs ear]      While you here do snoring lie,    Open-eyed conspiracy    His time doth take.    If of life you keep a care,    Shake off slumber and beware.    Awake! Awake!
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.
Traitor, thou liest.
Not I, I must be found.My parts, my title, and my perfect soulShall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
What, my lord?
I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.
This your requestIs altogether just: therefore bring forth,And in Apollos name, his oracle.
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
To answer by the method, in the first of his heart.
Come, say your prayers.
And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a sailor.
It is extempore, from my mother wit.
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here    I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,    If I do vow a friendship, Ill perform it    To the last article.   My lord shall never rest,    Ill watch him tame and talk him out of patience.    His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift,    Ill intermingle everything he does    With Cassios suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,    For thy solicitor shall rather die    Than give thy cause away.
Thou art proud, Apemantus.
(    aside    ) He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said, whisper! With as little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do, I will gyve thee in thine own courtship.   You say true, 'Tis so,indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are mostapt to play the sir in.   Very good, well kissed, and excellent courtesy! tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers to your lips? Would they were clyster-pipes foryour sake!
Call up my brotherOh, would you had had her!Some one way, some another. Do you knowWhere we may apprehend her and the Moor?
Can heaven be so envious?
Benedicite.    What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?    Young son, it argues a distempered head    So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.    Care keeps his watch in every old mans eye,    And where care lodges, sleep will never lie.    But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain    Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.    Therefore thy earliness doth me assure    Thou art uproused by some distemperature.    Or if not so, then here I hit it right:    Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
The trumpets show the emperor is at hand.
My lord,
Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel will amend. For give the dry fool drink, then is the fool notdry.   Bid the dishonest man mend himself. If he mend, heis no longer dishonest.   If he cannot, let the botcher mend him. Anything thats mended is but patched.   Virtue that transgresses is but patched with sin, and sin that amends is but patched with virtue.   If that this simple syllogism will serve, so. If it will not, what remedy?    As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so beautys a flower.   The lady bade take away the fool. Therefore, I say again, take her away.
Ah, he is young, and his minorityIs put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,A man that loves not me nor none of you.
And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.
'Tis conceived to scope.    This throne, this Fortune, and this hill, methinks,    With one man beckon'd from the rest below,    Bowing his head against the sleepy mount    To climb his happiness, would be well express'd    In our condition.
And what of all this?
Nay, then,    Do what thou canst, I will not go today,    No, nor tomorrow, not till I please myself.    The door is open, sir. There lies your way.    You may be jogging whiles your boots are green.    For me, Ill not be gone till I please myself.    'Tis like youll prove a jolly surly groom,    That take it on you at the first so roundly.
Madam.
Neither.
I fear it is too choleric a meat. How say you to a fat tripe finely broiled?
I did not kill your husband.
Come, captain, will you go?
O me! This sight of death is as a bell,That warns my old age to a sepulcher.
Is whispering nothing?    Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?    Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career    Of laughing with a sigh?   a note infallible    Of breaking honestyhorsing foot on foot?    Skulking in corners?   wishing clocks more swift?    Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes    Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,    That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?    Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;    The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;    My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,    If this be nothing.
Carry this mad knave to the jail.Father Baptista,I charge you see that he be forthcoming.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
Iago, look with care about the town    And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.    Come, Desdemona, tis the soldiers' life    To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
You make me marvel: wherefore ere this time    Had you not fully laid my state before me,    That I might so have rated my expense,    As I had leave of means?
[To BIANCA]  What, look you pale?Oh, bear him out o' the air.
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
[to QUEEN MARGARET]  Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? no.
If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.
Why dost thou call them knaves? thou know'st them not.
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
What sayst thou, my dear Nurse?
And rich: here is a water, look ye.
I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.
How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture of WeThree?
And you too, sir.
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh.After the battle let George Stanley die.
How can this be?
Then he disdains to shine, for by the bookHe should have braved the east an hour ago A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliffe!
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know,    That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake    A married life.    Her reason to herself is only known,    Which yet from her by no means can I get.
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above And all good men of this ungoverned isle.
I met a courier, one mine ancient friend;    Whom, though in general part we were opposed,    Yet our old love made a particular force,    And made us speak like friends:   this man was riding    From Alcibiades to Timon's cave,    With letters of entreaty, which imported    His fellowship i' the cause against your city,    In part for his sake moved.
She was here even now. She haunts me in every place. I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes the bauble and, by this hand, she falls me thus about my neck
I am aweary. Give me leave awhile.Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!
Then there's my glove;    Descend, and open your uncharged ports:    Those enemies of Timon's and mine own    Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof    Fall and no more:   and, to atone your fears    With my more noble meaning, not a man    Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream    Of regular justice in your city's bounds,    But shall be render'd to your public laws    At heaviest answer.
Not your gaoler, then,But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question youOf my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:You were pretty lordings then?
How likes she my discourse?
I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control
Ha, ha, ha!
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
Orsino. I have heard my father name him. He was a bachelor then.
I humbly thank you fort.
O, why should nature build so foul a den,Unless the gods delight in tragedies?
Ay, madam.
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
My lord of York will still be cross in talk.Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.Call, good Mercutio.
Good morrow, good Lieutenant. I am sorry    For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.    The general and his wife are talking of it,    And she speaks for you stoutly.   The Moor replies    That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus    And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom    He might not but refuse you.   But he protests he loves you    And needs no other suitor but his likings    To take the safest occasion by the front    To bring you in again.
Sure, all's effectless; yet nothing we'll omit    That bears recovery's name.   But, since your kindness    We have stretch'd thus far, let us beseech you    That for our gold we may provision have,    Wherein we are not destitute for want,    But weary for the staleness.
Tell me, heavenly bow,    If Venus or her son, as thou dost know,    Do now attend the queen?   Since they did plot    The means that dusky Dis my daughter got,    Her and her blind boys scandaled company    I have forsworn.
With signs of war about his aged neck:    O, full of careful business are his looks!    Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
If you were born to honour, show it now;    If put upon you, make the judgment good    That thought you worthy of it.
He hath, my lord.
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,    boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things    dying, I with things newborn.   Here's a sight for    thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's    child!   look thee here; take up, take up, boy;    open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be    rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:    open't. What's within, boy?
Hes married.
Say then my peace is made.
A prize! a prize!
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
[To PAGE]  Lead, boy. Which way?
[as LUCENTIO]  Perhaps him and her, sir. What have you to do?
Come, mistress; come your ways with me.
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
(to OTHELLO)    You must forsake this room and go with us.    Your power and your command is taken off    And Cassio rules in Cyprus.   For this slave,    If there be any cunning cruelty    That can torment him much and hold him long,    It shall be his.   You shall close prisoner rest    Till that the nature of your fault be known    To the Venetian state.Come, bring him away.
Go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea.   Be subject    To no sight but thine and mine, invisible    To every eyeball else.   Go take this shape    And hither come in t. Go hence with diligence.
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
Well, God give her good rest! What hath he sent her?
To th' syllable.
Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.
The higher powers forbid!
I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear.    I wis it is not halfway to her heart.    But if it were, doubt not her care should be    To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool    And paint your face and use you like a fool.
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, shebeing once gone.
Ay, but he will not now be pacified. Fabian can scarcehold him yonder.
Then I must not say no.
Let be, let be.Would I were dead, but that, methinks, alreadyWhat was he that did make it? See, my lord,Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veinsDid verily bear blood?
Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha t.
Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak moreThat speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
Why so you are, my thrice-renownèd lord.
I heard nothing.
I thought of her,Even in these looks I made.  [To FLORIZEL]  But your petitionIs yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,I am friend to them and you: upon which errandI now go toward him; therefore follow meAnd mark what way I make: come, good my lord.
Lets take leave of him.
My matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.
'Zounds, ye whore! is black so base a hue?Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom, sure.
[as LUCENTIO]  Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
A senseless villain, good Hortensio. I bade the rascal knock upon your gateAnd could not get him for my heart to do it.
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
You shall not choose but drink before you go.I think I shall command your welcome here,And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.
I beseech your Graces both to pardon me.    His majesty hath straitly given in charge    That no man shall have private conference,    Of what degree soever, with his brother.
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy    You have desire to purchase,   and your store,    I think, is not for idle markets, sir.
Ay, madam.
But oh, how vile an idol proves this god!    Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.    In nature theres no blemish but the mind.    None can be called deformed but the unkind.    Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil    Are empty trunks o'erflourished by the devil.
More to knowDid never meddle with my thoughts.
Nay, heaven doth know.
The Counts gentleman, one Cesario. We took him for a coward, but hes the very devil incardinate.
[Aside]   I'll meet you at the turn. What a    god's gold,    That he is worshipp'd in a baser temple    Than where swine feed!    'Tis thou that rigg'st the bark and plough'st the foam,    Settlest admired reverence in a slave:    To thee be worship! and thy saints for aye    Be crown'd with plagues that thee alone obey!    Fit I meet them.
Come, other sorts offend as well as we.
[as LUCENTIO]  Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
My hopes do shape him for the governor.
[kneeling]  As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.
Be you quiet, monster.Mistress line, is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line.Now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin.
Flatter my sorrow with report of it.Tell me what state, what dignity, what honor,Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane;    But if the prince do live, let us salute him,    Or know what ground's made happy by his breath.    If in the world he live, we'll seek him out;    If in his grave he rest, we'll find him there;    And be resolved he lives to govern us,    Or dead, give's cause to mourn his funeral,    And leave us to our free election.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:the curses he shall have, the tortures he shallfeel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
I see the play so liesThat I must bear a part.
To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or,    If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,    Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining    From course required;   or else thou must be counted    A servant grafted in my serious trust    And therein negligent;   or else a fool    That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,    And takest it all for jest.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the wayand lost all my money?
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee    Doth much excuse the appertaining rage    To such a greeting.   Villain am I none.    Therefore, farewell. I see thou knowst me not.
'Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay.    The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd    And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;    The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth    And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;    Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,    The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,    The other to enjoy by rage and war:    These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.    Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,    As well assured Richard their king is dead.
[Gives ROMEO poison]  Put this in any liquid thing youwillAnd drink it off; and, if you had the strengthOf twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Yet be content.
My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart.
O heaven!
Heres Lucentio, right son to the right Vincentio,That have by marriage made thy daughter mineWhile counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
[Aside]  I know them all, though they suppose me mad,And will o'erreach them in their own devices:A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam!
Lead away.
No matter. Get thee gone, And hire those horses. Ill be with thee straight.
With the same 'havior that your passion bearsGoes on my masters grief.
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
Ah, my good friend, what cheer?
[Aside]   Nor more willingly leaves winter; such    summer-birds are men.   Gentlemen, our dinner will not    recompense this long stay: feast your ears with the    music awhile, if they will fare so harshly o' the    trumpet's sound; we shall to 't presently.
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband,I am your wife in all obedience.
What in the contrary?
Keep it, I cannot eat it.
It is determined, not concluded yet;But so it must be if the king miscarry.
The man grows mad. Away with him. Come, come, sir.
You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre,    I left behind an ancient substitute:    Can you remember what I call'd the man?    I have named him oft.
Construe them.
Ill wait upon your Lordship.
She will indite him to some supper.
Till now you have gone on and fill'd the time    With all licentious measure, making your wills    The scope of justice;   till now myself and such    As slept within the shadow of your power    Have wander'd with our traversed arms and breathed    Our sufferance vainly:   now the time is flush,    When crouching marrow in the bearer strong    Cries of itself 'No more:'   now breathless wrong    Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,    And pursy insolence shall break his wind    With fear and horrid flight.
So:    Thou wilt not hear me now; thou shalt not then:    I'll lock thy heaven from thee.    O, that men's ears should be    To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!
Nay, Ill come. If I lose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with melancholy.
Time to be honest.
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes.
My recompense is thanks, that's all;Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Now, fellows, you are welcome.
Prove me, my gracious lord.
Romeo will answer it.
[sings]      Full fathom five thy father lies.    Of his bones are coral made.    Those are pearls that were his eyes.    Nothing of him that doth fade,    But doth suffer a sea-change    Into something rich and strange.    Sea nymphs hourly ring his knell.
Her father is Baptista Minola,    An affable and courteous gentleman.    Her name is Katherina Minola,    Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.
What good is covered with the face of heaven,To be discovered, that can do me good?
Why, what should you fear?
Ah, cut my lace asunder that my pent heart May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon With this dead-killing news!
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thoumightst have hit upon it here: the commonwealth ofAthens is become a forest of beasts.
And therefore tis called a sensible tale. And this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech list'ning.Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress
Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia's mine.
My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,    Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,    Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,    The effects of sorrow for his valiant sons,    Whose loss hath pierced him deep and scarr'd his heart;    And rather comfort his distressed plight    Than prosecute the meanest or the best    For these contempts.     [Aside]     Why, thus it shall become    High-witted Tamora to gloze with all:    But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick,    Thy life-blood out: if Aaron now be wise,    Then is all safe, the anchor's in the port.
A callat    Of boundless tongue,   who late hath beat her husband    And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;    It is the issue of Polixenes:    Hence with it, and together with the dam    Commit them to the fire!
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.
What, must it, nurse? then let no man but IDo execution on my flesh and blood.
[Aside]  How! the king gone!
What, were you snarling all before I came,    Ready to catch each other by the throat,    And turn you all your hatred now on me?    Did Yorks dread curse prevail so much with heaven    That Henrys death, my Lovelly Edwards death,    Their kingdoms loss, my woeful banishment,    Could all but answer for that peevish brat?    Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?    Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!    Though not by war, by surfeit die your king,    As ours by murder to make him a king.     [to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales,    For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,    Die in his youth by like untimely violence.    Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,    Outlive they glory, like my wretched self.    Long mayst thou live to wail they children's death    And see another, as I see thee now,    Decked in they rights, as thou art stalled in mine.    Long die thy happy days before they death,    And, after many lengthened hours of grief,    Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen.    Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by,    And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son    Was stabbed with bloody daggers.   God I pray Him    That none of you may live his natural age,    But by some unlooked accident cut off.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,And only live by gazing.
What means Sicilia?
My lord,
If I did love you in my masters flame,    With such a suffering, such a deadly life,    In your denial I would find no sense;    I would not understand it.
You may indeed say so,For twas that hand that gave away my heart.
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.
What is the matter?
Ay; would they served us!
I shall not dine at home, I meet the captains at the citadel.
Ass, I doubt not.
No question.
Sir, my lord,    I could do this, and that with no rash potion,    But with a lingering dram that should not work    Maliciously like poison:   but I cannot    Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,    So sovereignly being honourable.    I have loved thee,
Cousin, theres fall'n between him and my lordAn unkind breach, but you shall make all well.
So.
Bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride,    For the embracements even of Jove himself;    At whose conception, till Lucina reign'd,    Nature this dowry gave, to glad her presence,    The senate-house of planets all did sit,    To knit in her their best perfections.
Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curseupon thee!
As well as we! ay, and better too; we offend worse.    Neither is our profession any trade; it's no    calling. But here comes Boult.
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
[rising]  Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.
O Doricles,Your praises are too large: but that your youth,And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,You woo'd me the false way.
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.
What is the news i' the court?
I know, Iago, Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love theeBut never more be officer of mine.
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
Now I fear thee not.    Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool    To give thee all and in his waning age    Set foot under thy table.   Tut, a toy!    An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
And so will I.
You need not fear it, sir:This child was prisoner to the womb and isBy law and process of great nature thenceFreed and enfranchised, not a party toThe anger of the king nor guilty of,If any be, the trespass of the queen.
Hence from Verona art thou banishèd.Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Now the condition.    The King of Naples, being an enemy    To me inveterate, hearkens my brothers suit,    Which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises    Of homage and I know not how much tribute,    Should presently extirpate me and mine    Out of the dukedom,   and confer fair Milan    With all the honors on my brother. Whereon,    A treacherous army levied,   one midnight    Fated to th' purpose did Antonio open    The gates of Milan, and, i' th' dead of darkness,    The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence    Me and thy crying self.
My husband?
I'll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.
Women will love her, that she is a womanMore worth than any man; men, that she isThe rarest of all women.
O, sir, a courtesy    Which if we should deny, the most just gods    For every graff would send a caterpillar,    And so afflict our province.   Yet once more    Let me entreat to know at large the cause    Of your king's sorrow.
God hold it, to your Honors good content!
Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the    porpus how he bounced and tumbled?   they say    they're half fish, half flesh: a plague on them,    they ne'er come but I look to be washed.   Master, I    marvel how the fishes live in the sea.
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Ay; prithee, sing.
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold    In him that did object the same to thee!    He was the wretchedst thing when he was young,    So long a-growing and so leisurely,    That if this rule were true, he should be gracious.
Didst thou not say he comes?
Of Mantua.
'Tis passing good. I prithee let me have it.
And therefore is he idle?
[To LODOVICO]  This is Othellos ancient, as I take it.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closetTo help me sort such needful ornamentsAs you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
Ha, ha!What things are these, my lord Antonio?Will money buy 'em?
Romeo.
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?  Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,  may I say.
(  aside  ) Well said, Master Parson.
Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the    little ones:   I can compare our rich misers to    nothing so fitly as to a whale;   a' plays and    tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at    last devours them all at a mouthful:   such whales    have I heard on o' the land, who never leave gaping    till they've swallowed the whole parish, church,    steeple, bells, and all.
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?My men should call me lord. I am your goodman.
Faith, as you say, theres small choice in rotten apples.   But come, since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained till by helping Baptistas eldest daughter to a husband    we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have tot afresh.   Sweet Bianca! Happy man be his dole! He thatruns fastest gets the ring. How say you, Signior Gremio?
Safely in harbor    Is the kings ship. In the deep nook where once    Thou calledst me up at midnight to fetch dew    From the still-vexed Bermoothes, there shes hid.    The mariners all under hatches stowed,    Who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor,    I have left asleep.   And for the rest o' th' fleet,    Which I dispersed, they all have met again    And are upon the Mediterranean float,    Bound sadly home for Naples,    Supposing that they saw the kings ship wracked    And his great person perish.
Here he is, here he is. How ist with you, sir? How ist with you, man?
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.
[aside]  Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
Give me thy hand,And let me see thee in thy womans weeds.
Ay, a thousand times Peter!
My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,    For which your honor and your faith is pawned    Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables    Which you promisèd I shall possess.
Sir Walter Herbert, a renownèd soldier;    Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,    Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,    And Rhys-ap-Thomas, with a valiant crew,    And many other of great name and worth;    And towards London they do bend their power,    If by the way they be not fought withal.
And soAm I to you.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth, And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
I know not, an't like you.
Strike!
Not a soul    But felt a fever of the mad and played    Some tricks of desperation.   All but mariners    Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,    Then all afire with me. The kings son, Ferdinand,    With hair up-staringthen, like reeds, not hair    Was the first man that leaped, cried, Hell is empty    And all the devils are here.
What I have been I have forgot to know;    But what I am, want teaches me to think on:    A man throng'd up with cold: my veins are chill,    And have no more of life than may suffice    To give my tongue that heat to ask your help;    Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,    For that I am a man, pray see me buried.
Oh, look, sir, look, sir! Here is more of us.    I prophesied if a gallows were on land,    This fellow could not drown.     [To BOATSWAIN]    Now, blasphemy,    That swearst grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore?    Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?
I will chop her into messes! Cuckold me?
Ah, weraday! Hes dead, hes dead, hes dead!We are undone, lady, we are undone!Alack the day! Hes gone, hes killed, hes dead!
I must serve him so too, tell him of an intentthat's coming toward him.
Erroneous vassals, the great King of kings    Hath in the tables of His law commanded    That thou shalt do no murder.   Will thou then    Spurn at His edict and fulfill a mans?    Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand    To hurl upon their heads that break His law.
No, my most worthy master; in whose breast    Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late:    You should have fear'd false times when you did feast:    Suspect still comes where an estate is least.    That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,    Duty and zeal to your unmatched mind,    Care of your food and living;   and, believe it,    My most honour'd lord,    For any benefit that points to me,    Either in hope or present, I'ld exchange    For this one wish, that you had power and wealth    To requite me, by making rich yourself.
Your husband being troubled with a shrew Measures my husbands sorrow by his woe.And now you know my meaning.
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,How went he under him?
I do well believe your highness, and did it to ministeroccasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.
I' faith, hell have a lusty widow nowThat shall be wooed and wedded in a day.
Here comes the lord of Buckingham, and Derby.
Alack the day. Shes dead, shes dead, shes dead!
Tis well thou art not fish. If thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john.Draw thy tool! Here comes of the house of Montagues.
Yet let me obtain my wish.
Honest, ay, honest.
Were it better I should rush in thus    But where is Kate? Where is my love?    How does my father?   Gentles, methinks you frown.    And wherefore gaze this goodly company    As if they saw some wondrous monument,    Some comet or unusual prodigy?
Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so.
Nay, good lieutenant! I pray you, sir, hold your hand.  [stays him]
Sweet, so would I.    Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.    Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow    That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Here is more news.
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serveFor sweet discourses in our time to come.
I do not know    One of my sex, no womans face remember    Save, from my glass, mine own. Nor have I seen    More that I may call men than you, good friend,    And my dear father.   How features are abroad    I am skill-less of, but, by my modesty,    The jewel in my dower, I would not wish    Any companion in the world but you,    Nor can imagination form a shape    Besides yourself to like of. But I prattle    Something too wildly, and my fathers precepts    I therein do forget.
Kind gentlemen, lets go see poor Cassio dressed.    Come, mistress, you must tell s another tale.    Emilia, run you to the citadel    And tell my lord and lady what hath happed.    Will you go on afore?     (aside)     This is the night    That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
My father Capulet will have it so,And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
[aside]  This will I tell my master.
Nor I neither.
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some    care; so far that I have eyes under my service which    look upon his removedness;   from whom I have this    intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a    most homely shepherd;   a man, they say, that from    very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his    neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
Sir, 'tis the governor of Mytilene,Who, hearing of your melancholy state,Did come to see you.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,Son of Polixenes, with his princess, sheThe fairest I have yet beheld, desires accessTo your high presence.
Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.
Ratcliffe, come hither. Post to Salisbury.    When thou comst thither        [to CATESBY]    Dull, unmindful villain,    Why stayst thou here and gost not to the duke?
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.    Whats here? A cup, closed in my true loves hand?    Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.    O churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop    To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.    Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,    To make me die with a restorative.    [Kisses ROMEO]    Thy lips are warm.
Its true, good lieutenant.
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! Your eyes do menace me. Why look you pale?Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
To every article.    I boarded the kings ship. Now on the beak,    Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,    I flamed amazement.   Sometime Id divide,    And burn in many places. On the topmast,    The yards, and bowsprit would I flame distinctly,    Then meet and join.   Joves lightning, the precursors    O' th' dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary    And sight-outrunning were not.   The fire and cracks    Of sulfurous roaring the most mighty Neptune    Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,    Yea, his dread trident shake.
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!
What should you fear?    'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into    For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.
Prithee, peace.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:Your servants servant is your servant, madam.
Do, good my lord. Your citizens entreat you.
Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear.Ye cannot reason almost with a man That looks not heavily and full of dread.
Ay, too gentle.
Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along,    That you will wonder what hath fortuned.    Come, Proteus; 'tis your penance but to hear    The story of your loves discovered:    That done, our day of marriage shall be yours;    One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.
(sings) Shall I bid him go?
Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue    Should become kings of Naples?   O, rejoice    Beyond a common joy, and set it down    With gold on lasting pillars. In one voyage    Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis;    And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife    Where he himself was lost; Prospero, his dukedom    In a poor isle;   and all of us, ourselves    When no man was his own.
Oh, that the slave had forty thousand lives!    One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.    Now do I see tis true.   Look here, Iago,    All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven'tis gone.    Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell!    Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne    To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,    For tis of aspics' tongues!
To be a make-peace shall become my age:Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.
These eyes could never endure that beautys wrack.    You should not blemish it, if I stood by.    As all the world is cheerèd by the sun,    So I by that. It is my day, my life.
Hie to your chamber. Ill find Romeo    To comfort you. I wot well where he is.    Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.    Ill to him. He is hid at Lawrence cell.
By this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster.When s gods asleep, hell rob his bottle.
[to MIRANDA]  Awake, dear heart, awake! Thou hast slept well.Awake!
Empress I am, but yonder sits the emperor.
My lord, I hold my life as dear as you do yours,    And never in my days, I do protest,    Was it so precious to me as tis now.    Think you but that I know our state secure,    I would be so triumphant as I am?
I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee. My mistress showed me thee and thy dog and thy bush.
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.
Ay, and hell tame her.
How well my comfort is revived by this!
Never, my lord.
A piece of painting, which I do beseechYour lordship to accept.
Then you love us, we you, and we'll clasp hands:When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack.If it prove lawful prize, hes made for ever.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.Good signior, you shall more command with yearsThan with your weapons.
[t    o  SIR TOBY BELCH   ]  Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! Did not I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a care of him.
Before me! Look, where she comes.
Where is the Master, Boatswain?
She is indeed perfection.
Why dost thou stay?
What men of name resort to him?
Look, and thou shalt see.
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
[to ARIEL]  Thou shalt be freeAs mountain winds. But then exactly doAll points of my command.
Yet you are withered.
Too like the sire for ever being good.    First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl;    A sight to vex the father's soul withal.    Get me a ladder.
My lord.
Asses.
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
So, so, there!    Aches contract and starve your supple joints!    That there should be small love 'mongst these    sweet knaves,    And all this courtesy!   The strain of man's bred out    Into baboon and monkey.
Knowst thou not any whom corrupting goldWill tempt unto a close exploit of death?
With Rosaline, my ghostly Father? No.I have forgot that name and that names woe.
I am glad you're well.
I'll swear for 'em.
[aside]  Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings.    The sun for sorrow will not show his head.    Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;    Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd;    For never was a story of more woe    Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
He's opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in,And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoesThe very heart of kindness.
A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.    'Tis a spirit: sometime't appears like a lord;    sometime like a lawyer;   sometime like a philosopher,    with two stones moe than's artificial one: he is    very often like a knight; and, generally, in all    shapes that man goes up and down in from fourscore    to thirteen, this spirit walks in.
Anything.
[Aside]  Excellent workman! thou canst not paint aman so bad as is thyself.
Welcome, AEmilius what's the news from Rome?
Nay, good Sir Toby.
To be Count Malvolio!
Sir!
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:    we cannot with such magnificencein so rareI know not what to say.     We will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse us.
But as tis,    We cannot miss him.   He does make our fire,    Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices    That profit us.   What, ho! Slave! Caliban!    Thou earth, thou! Speak.
Save you, worthy general!
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve    That do conspire my death with devilish plots    Of damnèd witchcraft,   and that have prevailed    Upon my body with their hellish charms?
Irreparable is the loss, and patienceSays it is past her cure.
No shame but mine. I must, forsooth, be forced    To give my hand, opposed against my heart,    Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen,    Who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure.    I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,    Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior,    And, to be noted for a merry man,    Hell woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,    Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns,    Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed.    Now must the world point at poor Katherine    And say, Lo, there is mad Petruchios wife,    If it would please him come and marry her!
My lord, I take my leave.  [going]
Alas, my lord,-
And must we be divided? must we part?
Call them forth.
What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?
Trust me, I fear it has.    I hope you will consider what is spoke    Comes from my love. But I do see youre moved.    I am to pray you not to strain my speech    To grosser issues nor to larger reach    Than to suspicion.
[aside to  HORTENSIO  ]    Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.    Much good do it unto thy gentle heart.    Kate, eat apace. And now, my honey love,    Will we return unto thy fathers house    And revel it as bravely as the best,    With silken coats and caps and golden rings,    With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things,    With scarves and fans and double change of brav'ry,    With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.    What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure    To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
Most sweet lady
Thy yellow stockings?
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning.    Theres some conceit or other likes him well    When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.    I think theres never a man in Christendom    Can lesser hide his love or hate than he,    For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
Ay, my lord.
Why, then she is the devil's dam; a joyful issue.
How now, gentleman? How is t with you?
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house   ;    For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated:    Tell her I send to her my kind commends;    Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.
Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebused your Worship?
Good morrow to your lordship.
Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and her will is it should be so returned.   [he throws down the ring]    If it be worth stooping for, there it lies in your eye. If not, be it his that finds it.
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancyMay think anon it moves.
If the king had no son, they would desire to liveon crutches till he had one.
My father hath a power; inquire of himAnd learn to make a body of a limb.
I am glad to see you mad.
Whats the matter?
You would not hear me,At many leisures I proposed.
A husband? A devil!
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes    That have been so bedazzled with the sun    That everything I look on seemeth green.    Now I perceive thou art a reverend father.    Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
But that you do not love me.I pray you bring me on the way a littleAnd say if I shall see you soon at night.
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child    And here was left by th' sailors. Thou, my slave,    As thou reportst thyself, wast then her servant.    And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate    To act her earthy and abhorred commands,    Refusing her grand hests,   she did confine thee,    By help of her more potent ministers    And in her most unmitigable rage,    Into a cloven pine,   within which rift    Imprisoned thou didst painfully remain    A dozen years; within which space she died    And left thee there,   where thou didst vent thy groans    As fast as mill wheels strike. Then was this island    Save for the son that she did litter here,    A freckled whelp hag-bornnot honored with    A human shape.
The great contention of the sea and skiesParted our fellowship
Excellently done, if God did all.
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.     (to OTHELLO)     O murderous coxcomb! What should such a fool    Do with so good a wife?
Knows he of this?
Good Sir Toby!
Thy husband.
What you do    Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.    I'ld have you do it ever:   when you sing,    I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,    Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,    To sing them too:   when you do dance, I wish you    A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do    Nothing but that; move still, still so,    And own no other function:   each your doing,    So singular in each particular,    Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,    That all your acts are queens.
God shield I should disturb devotion!Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.  [Kisses her]  Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you;Ay, so well, that you must be her master,And she will be your scholar: therefore look to it.
Pardon, madam:    The one I have almost forgot,your pardon,    The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,    Will have your tongue too.   This is a creature,    Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal    Of all professors else, make proselytes    Of who she but bid follow.
What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
I hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.
How canst thou urge Gods dreadful law to usWhen thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
'Tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.
Ill follow this good man, and go with you;And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.
O Cassio, whence came this?    This is some token from a newer friend!    To the felt absence now I feel a cause.    Is t come to this? Well, well.
Go ask his name.
But, soft! here come my executioners.How now, my hardy, stout, resolvèd mates?Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselvesDo strike at my injustice.  [HERMIONE swoons]  How now there!
Here.Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste,For comfort is too far for us to expect.
My noble father,    I do perceive here a divided duty.    To you I am bound for life and education.    My life and education both do learn me    How to respect you. You are the lord of duty.    I am hitherto your daughter.   But heres my husband.    And so much duty as my mother showed    To you, preferring you before her father,    So much I challenge that I may profess    Due to the Moor my lord.
Lord Timon, hear me speak.
[Giving PETER her fan]  Before, and apace.
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping.    My dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one    My daughter might have been:   my queen's square brows;    Her stature to an inch; as wand-like straight;    As silver-voiced; her eyes as jewel-like    And cased as richly; in pace another Juno;    Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them hungry,    The more she gives them speech. Where do you live?
Full half an hour.
This news is mortal to the queen: look downAnd see what death is doing.
Too old by heaven. Let still the woman take    An elder than herself.   So wears she to him,    So sways she level in her husbands heart.    For, boy, however we do praise ourselves,    Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm,    More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,    Than womens are.
Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Nor you, as we are, loyal.
We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.
Ventidius lately    Buried his father; by whose death he's stepp'd    Into a great estate:   when he was poor,    Imprison'd and in scarcity of friends,    I clear'd him with five talents:   greet him from me;    Bid him suppose some good necessity    Touches his friend, which craves to be remember'd    With those five talents.
I thank thee for that jest. Heres a garment for t. Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this country. Steal by line and level is an excellent pass of pate. Theres another garment for t.
Wrench his sword from him.
I never did her any, to my knowledge.
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
I do not, sir.
Here is the cap your Worship did bespeak.
[To OLIVIA]   Be not amazed. Right noble is his blood.    If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,    I shall have share in this most happy wreck.    [To VIOLA]   Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times    Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal?
We know each others faces; for our hearts,    He knows no more of mine than I of yours,    Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.    Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
Ill have this crown of mine cut from my shouldersBefore Ill see the crown so foul misplaced.But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
I told him that your father was at Venice,And that you looked for him this day in Padua.
Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,    My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow    More than my brother:   Ay, quoth my uncle Gloucester,    Small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace.    And since, methinks I would not grow so fast    Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!    Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.    'Tis in my head to do my master good.    I see no reason but supposed Lucentio    Must get a father, called supposed Vincentio    And thats a wonder.   Fathers commonly    Do get their children. But in this case of wooing,    A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
O miserable, unhappy that I am!
[to SEBASTIAN]  Ha, ha, ha!
Ariel, thy chargeExactly is performed. But theres more work.What is the time o' th' day?
Orsino, noble sir,    Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me.    Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,    Though, I confess, on base and ground enough,    Orsinos enemy.   A witchcraft drew me hither.    That most ingrateful boy there by your side    From the rude seas enraged and foamy mouth    Did I redeem.   A wreck past hope he was.    His life I gave him and did thereto add    My love, without retention or restraint,    All his in dedication.   For his sake    Did I expose myself, pure for his love,    Into the danger of this adverse town,    Drew to defend him when he was beset,    Where being apprehended, his false cunning,    (Not meaning to partake with me in danger)    Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,    And grew a twenty-years-removed thing    While one would wink, denied me mine own purse,    Which I had recommended to his use    Not half an hour before.
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.
God be with you, sir; I will.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?    Doth she not think me an old murderer,    Now I have stained the childhood of our joy    With blood removed but little from her own?    Where is she? And how doth she? And what says    My concealed lady to our canceled love?
She hath been fairer, madam, than she is:    When she did think my master loved her well,    She, in my judgment, was as fair as you:    But since she did neglect her looking-glass    And threw her sun-expelling mask away,    The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks    And pinch'd the lily-tincture of her face,    That now she is become as black as I.
Upon my knee, what doth your speech import?I understand a fury in your words,But not the words.
It shall not live.
He went hence but now,And certainly in strange unquietness.
Ha, ha!Publius, Publius, what hast thou done?See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
But I have cause to pry into this pedant.    Methinks he looks as though he were in love.    Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble    To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale,    Seize thee that list!   If once I find thee ranging,    Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
That handkerchiefWhich I so loved and gave thee, thou gavstTo Cassio.
It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, heres my purse.    [giving him money]    In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,    Is best to lodge.   I will bespeak our diet,    Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge    With viewing of the town. There shall you have me.
I have already.
My cake is dough, but Ill in among the rest,Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.
Whos there?
Follow me, then. Lord Helicane, a word.
A herald, Kate? Oh, put me in thy books!
Nor go neither. But youll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither.
What noise?
A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it. Where lies your text?
Thou wast provokèd by thy bloody mind, That never dreamst on aught but butcheries.Didst thou not kill this king?
None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing,Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
Well, I say no. And therefore, for assurance,    Lets each one send unto his wife;    And he whose wife is most obedient    To come at first when he doth send for her,    Shall win the wager which we will propose.
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common    hangman shall execute it.   Come your ways. We'll    have no more gentlemen driven away. Come your ways, I say.
By his great authority;Which often hath no less prevail'd than soOn your command.
When I was born:    Never was waves nor wind more violent;    And from the ladder-tackle washes off    A canvas-climber.   'Ha!' says one, 'wilt out?'    And with a dropping industry they skip    From stem to stern:   the boatswain whistles, and    The master calls, and trebles their confusion.
I swear
If this proveA vision of the Island, one dear sonShall I twice lose.
Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead.
Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
Away, inhuman dog! unhallow'd slave!Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in.
Sorry I am my noble cousin should    Suspect me that I mean no good to him.    By heaven, we come to him in perfect love,    And so once more return and tell his grace.
A pretty moral;From the dejected state wherein he is,He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.
[tracing a circle on the ground]     Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves,    And ye that on the sands with printless foot    Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him    When he comes back;   you demi-puppets that    By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make,    Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime    Is to make midnight mushrooms,   that rejoice    To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid,    Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimmed    The noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds,    And twixt the green sea and the azured vault    Set roaring warto th' dread rattling thunder    Have I given fire, and rifted Joves stout oak    With his own bolt;   the strong-based promontory    Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up    The pine and cedar; graves at my command    Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let 'em forth    By my so potent art.   But this rough magic    I here abjure, and when I have required    Some heavenly music, which even now I do,    To work mine end upon their senses that    This airy charm is for,   Ill break my staff,    Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,    And deeper than did ever plummet sound    Ill drown my book.
A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.
Ill have no halves. Ill bear it all myself.
Very noblyHave you deserved: it is my father's musicTo speak your deeds, not little of his careTo have them recompensed as thought on.
Women nearest; but men, men are the thingsthemselves. What wouldst thou do with the world,Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?
What tongueless blocks were they! Would not they speak?Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging    About his neck, Bohemia:   who, if I    Had servants true about me, that bare eyes    To see alike mine honour as their profits,    Their own particular thrifts, they would do that    Which should undo more doing:   ay, and thou,    His cupbearer,whom I from meaner form    Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see    Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,    How I am galled,   mightst bespice a cup,    To give mine enemy a lasting wink;    Which draught to me were cordial.
Had I a steward    So true, so just, and now so comfortable?    It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.    Let me behold thy face. Surely, this man    Was born of woman.    Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,    You perpetual-sober gods! I do proclaim    One honest manmistake me notbut one;    No more, I pray,and he's a steward.    How fain would I have hated all mankind!    And thou redeem'st thyself: but all, save thee,    I fell with curses.    Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;    For, by oppressing and betraying me,    Thou mightst have sooner got another service:    For many so arrive at second masters,    Upon their first lord's neck.   But tell me true    For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure    Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,    If not a usuring kindness, and, as rich men deal gifts,    Expecting in return twenty for one?
What say you, master?
Send out a pursuivant-at-arms    To Stanleys regiment.   Bid him bring his power    Before sunrising, lest his son George fall    Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Meaning to curtsy?
Three talents on the present; in future, all.
She's a gallant lady.
Away towards Salisbury! While we reason here,    A royal battle might be won and lost.    Someone take order Buckingham be brought    To Salisbury. The rest march on with me.
Sir, even nowDid the sea toss upon our shore this chest:'Tis of some wreck.
Do it not with poison. Strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated.
Lay't so to his charge:He's with the king your father.
Thats all one: has hurt me, and theres the end on t.  [To FOOL]  Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?
[To VIOLA]   Come, away!
Why, York, what wilt thou do?    Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?    Have we more sons? or are we like to have?    Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?    And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,    And rob me of a happy mother's name?    Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the conditionof that fardel, the place of your dwelling, yournames, your ages, of what having, breeding, and anything that is fitting to be known, discover.
And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You shall hear more by midnight.
What means our cousin, that he stares and looksSo wildly?
Why, man, hes a very devil. I have not seen such a firago.   I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all, and he gives me the stuck-in with such a mortal motion, that it is inevitable.   And on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they stepon.   They say he has been fencer to the Sophy.
What kind of woman ist?
None, but toMaintain my opinion.
Draw together.And when I rear my hand, do you the like,To fall it on Gonzalo.
Come away.
I have another weapon in this chamber,    It was a sword of Spain, the ice-brooks temper.    Oh, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.
I willingly obey your command.
What, art thou ashamed of me?
All ready. And therefore, I pray thee, news.
Presently?
And, uncle, so will I, an if I live.
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,    And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir:    Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,    And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,    Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.
How many women saw this child of his?
Marry, I will. Let them play it. Is not a comonty aChristmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
In loveWho respects friend?
O, take her home, mistress, take her home: theseblushes of hers must be quenched with some present practise.
I'll ha' thee burnt.
And tis great pity that the noble Moor    Should hazard such a place as his own second    With one of an ingraft infirmity.    It were an honest action to say    So to the Moor.
'Tis pitiful, but yet Iago knows    That she with Cassio hath the act of shame    A thousand times committed.   Cassio confessed it,    And she did gratify his amorous works    With that recognizance and pledge of love    Which I first gave her.   I saw it in his hand,    It was a handkerchief, an antique token    My father gave my mother.
Nay, come, sit down; then on.
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.    The king, on his own royal disposition,    And not provoked by any suitor else,    Aiming belike at your interior hatred    That in your outward actions shows itself    Against my children, brothers, and myself,    Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground    Of your ill will, and thereby to remove it.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a manAs all the world. Why, hes a man of wax.
Good Lord, how like the empress' sons they are!    And you, the empress! but we worldly men    Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.    O sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee;    And, if one arm's embracement will content thee,    I will embrace thee in it by and by.
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.    Tomorrow, in my judgement, is too sudden,    For I myself am not so well provided    As else I would be, were the day prolonged.
Why?
I would therefore my sister had no name, sir.
Shell none o' the count.   Shell not match above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit. I have heard her swear t   . Tut, theres life in t, man.
I blush to think upon this ignomy.
What then?
Sit, sir, sit.
He took good rest to-night;'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.
The woman falls! Sure he hath killed his wife.
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely. Comes there any more of it?
I have a pain upon my forehead, here.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.    Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil    Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
O, in the duke of Gloucesters purse.
Excellent.
Nay, let him alone. Ill go another way to work with him.   Ill have an action of battery against him if therebe any law in Illyria.   Though I struck him first, yet its no matter for that.
No, marry. I fear thee.
What news abroad?
O, ho, entreat her!Nay, then she must needs come.
'I go, sir!'Take the bonds along with you,And have the dates in contempt.
Throw thy glove,    Or any token of thine honour else,    That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress    And not as our confusion,   all thy powers    Shall make their harbour in our town, till we    Have seal'd thy full desire.
Gramercies, good fool: how does your mistress?
To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runnst away.
Who sets me else?   by heaven, I'll throw at all:    I have a thousand spirits in one breast,    To answer twenty thousand such as you.
I' fecks!    Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast    smutch'd thy nose?    They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,    We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:    And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf    Are all call'd neat.   Still virginalling    Upon his palm!   How now, you wanton calf!    Art thou my calf?
Marry, I will, and this is wisely done.
But can you teach all this you speak of?
Do not then walk too open.
I shall be much bound to you for t. I am one that hadrather go with sir priest than sir knight. I care not who knows so much of my mettle.
Not so; I think she lives.
[to ALONSO]    Behold, sir King,    The wrongèd Duke of Milan, Prospero.    For more assurance that a living prince    Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body.    And to thee and thy company I bid    A hearty welcome.    [embraces ALONSO]
Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee,For knowing thee to be but young and light
I will stand to and feed,    Although my last.   No matter,   since I feel    The best is past. Brother, my lord the duke,    Stand to and do as we.
With her, on her, what you will.
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.
I hate thee worse.
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you, For I attend here. But Ill see you soon.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,The men you talk of came into my mind.What, go you toward the Tower?
Is he well shipped?
If thou didst know me, thou wouldest talk with me.
I think his soul is in hell, madonna.
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonightI do entreat that we may sup together. You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys!
No. So God help me, they spake not a word    But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,    Stared each on other and looked deadly pale;    Which when I saw, I reprehended them    And asked the mayor what meant this willful silence.    His answer was, the people were not used    To be spoke to but by the recorder.    Then he was urged to tell my tale again:    Thus saith the duke. Thus hath the duke inferred    But nothing spoke in warrant from himself.    When he had done, some followers of mine own,    At the lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps,    And some ten voices cried God save King Richard!    And thus I took the vantage of those few.    Thanks, gentle citizens and friends, quoth I.    "This general applause and cheerful shout    Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard"    And even here brake off, and came away.
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,If thou but thinkst him wronged and makst his earA stranger to thy thoughts.
Welcome, ass. Now lets have a catch.
The time to come.
Remember our reward when the deeds done.
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily wound. There is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without deserving.   You have lost no reputation at all unless yourepute yourself such a loser. What, man, there are waysto recover the general again.   You are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion. Sue to him again and hes yours.
Good my lord,
'Tis certain then for Cyprus.Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
Ay, my good lord: five talents is his debt,    His means most short, his creditors most strait:    Your honourable letter he desires    To those have shut him up; which failing,    Periods his comfort.
If you had sent but two hours before,
Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.
Well mock'd.
Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,    To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then,    If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster    More than their own! What then? How then?    What shall I say? Wheres satisfaction?    It is impossible you should see this,    Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,    As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross    As ignorance made drunk.   But yet, I say,    If imputation and strong circumstances    Which lead directly to the door of truth    Will give you satisfaction, you may have t.
Whats the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put tricks upon s with savages and men of Ind, ha? I have not scaped drowning to be afeard now of your four legs.   Or it hath been said, As proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground, and it shall be said so again while Stephano breathes at' nostrils.
Lend me a garter. So.Oh, for a chair,To bear him easily hence!
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,    With all the rest of that consorted crew,    Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.    Good uncle, help to order several powers    To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:    They shall not live within this world, I swear,    But I will have them, if I once know where.    Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:    Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.
I thank them; and would send them back the plague,Could I but catch it for them.
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
I would we had a thousand Roman damesAt such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.
[aside]  So wise so young, they say, do never live long.
That dignifies the renown of a bawd, no less than itgives a good report to a number to be chaste.
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,    My very noble and approved good masters,    That I have ta'en away this old mans daughter,    It is most true. True, I have married her.    The very head and front of my offending    Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,    And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace,    For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith    Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used    Their dearest action in the tented field,    And little of this great world can I speak,    More than pertains to feats of broils and battle,    And therefore little shall I grace my cause    In speaking for myself.   Yet, by your gracious patience,    I will a round unvarnished tale deliver    Of my whole course of love.   What drugs, what charms,    What conjuration and what mighty magic    For such proceeding I am charged withal    I won his daughter.
[to GONZALO]  First, noble friend,Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannotBe measured or confined.
Well show thee Io as she was a maidAnd how she was beguileèd and surprised,As lively painted as the deed was done.
Traitor!
I am no strumpet, but of life as honestAs you that thus abuse me.
Where have  I  been? Nay, how now, where are you? Master,has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or you stolenhis? Or both? Pray, whats the news?
Be it as you shall privately determine, Either for her stay or going. Th' affair cries hasteAnd speed must answer it.
I cannot tell. I fear tis choleric. What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
Sir Topas!
Bless me from marrying a usurer!
Tis more, tis more. His son is elder, sir.His son is thirty.
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.
Ay, husband. Can he that deny?
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
And give me leave,And do not say 'tis superstition, thatI kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady,Dear queen, that ended when I but began,Give me that hand of yours to kiss.
You shall prevail,Were it to woo my daughter; for it seemsYou have been noble towards her.
Where I am but a stranger: from the deckYou may discern the place.
To save her life, Ill say she is not so.
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.
Faith, here it is.    Romeo is banishèd, and all the world to nothing    That he dares neer come back to challenge you.    Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.    Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,    I think it best you married with the county.    Oh, hes a lovely gentleman.    Romeos a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,    Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye    As Paris hath.   Beshrew my very heart,    I think you are happy in this second match,    For it excels your first. Or if it did not,    Your first is dead, or twere as good he were,    As living here and you no use of him.
O knight, thou lackest a cup of canary. When did I see thee so put down?
Oh, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,    And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,    And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,    And then down falls again.
Why, our battalia trebles that account.    Besides, the kings name is a tower of strength    Which they upon the adverse party want.    Up with the tent!Come, noble gentlemen,    Let us survey the vantage of the ground.    Call for some men of sound direction.    Lets lack no discipline, make no delay,    For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
Catesby, o'erlook the walls.
Now he importunes himTo tell it o'er. Go to, well said, well said.
Stay, officer. He shall not go to prison.
Villain, I say, knock me at this gateAnd rap me well, or Ill knock your knaves pate.
The man is honest.
A very mean meaning.
If that the Turkish fleetBe not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.It is impossible they bear it out.
Of love?
Well, sir, we will not.
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if I be a dog?
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
I cannot too much muse    Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, expressing,    Although they want the use of tongue, a kind    Of excellent dumb discourse.
Oh, heaven forgive us!
For me,    That am a maid, though most ungentle fortune    Have placed me in this sty, where, since I came,    Diseases have been sold dearer than physic,    O, that the gods    Would set me free from this unhallow'd place,    Though they did change me to the meanest bird    That flies i' the purer air!
Ay, and much more; but I was born so high.Our aerie buildeth in the cedars top,And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
Thy reason, man?
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen,And, princely peers, a happy time of day.
Fellow Grumio!
This found I on my tent this morning.
Romeo, my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
More man? plague, plague!
[to ALONSO]  Sir
O God!O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?    My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.    How shall that faith return again to earth,    Unless that husband send it me from heaven    By leaving earth?   Comfort me. Counsel me.    Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems    Upon so soft a subject as myself.    What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?    Some comfort, Nurse.
This is all:Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;Do't not, thou split'st thine own.
My hand to thee; mine honour on my promise.
No, sir, no jot. I know your favor well,Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.Take him away. He knows I know him well.
Sings     It was the friar of orders gray,      As he forth walkèd on his way    :    A servant tries to take off  PETRUCHIO  s boots.    Out, you rogue! You pluck my foot awry.    Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.    Strikes the servant    Be merry, Kate.Some water, here, what, ho!    Wheres my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence    And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither.
Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon: I come toobserve; I give thee warning on't.
By my troth, sir, nothough it please you to be one of my friends.
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
Why, fare thee well:Here is some gold for thee.
I took him to be killed with a thunderstroke. But art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the deadmooncalfs gaberdine for fear of the storm.   And art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans scaped!    [dances STEPHANO about]
Prithee, say on.    The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim    A matter from thee,   and a birth indeed    Which throes thee much to yield.
Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio  Petruchio.Rise, Grumio, rise. We will compound this quarrel.
Ay, to me.    She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted    By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks.    For nature so prepost'rously to err,    Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,    Sans witchcraft could not.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
I thank you; you shall hear from me anon:Go not away. What have you there, my friend?
Stay your thanks a while;And pay them when you part.
A mighty man of Pisa. By report    I know him well. You are very welcome, sir.    [To  HORTENSIO  as  LITIO  ]   Take you the lute,    [To  LUCENTIO  as  CAMBIO  ]   and you the set of books.    You shall go see your pupils presently.    Holla, within!
I also wish it to you. I think this honourable lorddid but try us this other day.
More whore, more mischief first; I have given you earnest.
If you require a little space for prayer,    I grant it: pray; but be not tedious,    For the gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn    To do my work with haste.
I know none such, my lord.
[as VINCENTIO]  Lay hands on the villain. I believe he means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.
Do, and be witness to 't.
Why, thats all one.
Good heart, at what?
My lord,If I can get him within my pistol's length,I'll make him sure enough: so, farewell to your highness.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,    One of our order, to associate me,    Here in this city visiting the sick,    And finding him, the searchers of the town,    Suspecting that we both were in a house    ere the infectious pestilence did reign,    Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth.    So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
O, sir, things must be as they may; and what a mancannot get, he may lawfully deal forhis wife's soul.
What kind o' man is he?
Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.
Doth my lord call?
Come, your hand;And, daughter, yours.
Madam, I will.
But so is not she.
I do think so. Pray you, turn your eyes upon me.You are like something thatWhat country-woman?Here of these shores?
My life, sir! how, I pray? For that goes hard.
[as LUCENTIO]  Why, shes a devil, a devil, the devils dam.
It does: but time willand so
Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poorbastards,as, I think, I have brought up some eleven
Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, I am loath to prove reason with them.
Indifferent.
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,    Makes the night morning, and the noontide night.    Princes have but their titles for their glories,    An outward honor for an inward toil,    And, for unfelt imaginations,    They often feel a world of restless cares,    So that betwixt their titles and low name    There's nothing differs but the outward fame.
He's been told so, and he says hell stand at your door like a sheriffs post, and be the supporter to a bench, but hell speak with you.
Hail, sir! my lord, lend ear.
I follow you.
(  aside  ) Marry, hang thee, brock!
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.
What if I do obey?    How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,    Whose messengers are here about my side    Upon some present business of the state    To bring me to him?
Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,William Lord Hastings had pronounced your partI mean your voice for crowning of the king.
Which way is he, in the name of sanctity?   If all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possessed him, yet Ill speak to him.
Come, come. Have with you. Wot you what, my lord?Today the lords you talked of are beheaded.
He that has the two fair daughtersis t he you mean?
Whither, my lord?Cesario, husband, stay.
O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
Cornelia the midwife and myself;And no one else but the deliver'd empress.
I hope so.
He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,    To visit him tomorrow or next day.    He is within, with two right reverend fathers,    Divinely bent to meditation,    And in no worldly suits would he be moved    To draw him from his holy exercise.
No, I'll nothing: for if I should be bribed too,    there would be none left to rail upon thee, and then    thou wouldst sin the faster.   Thou givest so long,    Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in    paper shortly: what need these feasts, pomps and    vain-glories?
Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir!    You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms!    What, no attendance? No regard? No duty?    Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
I told him what I thought, and told no moreThan what he found himself was apt and true.
He is a kinsman to the Montague.    Affection makes him false. He speaks not true.    Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,    And all those twenty could but kill one life.    I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.    Romeo slew Tybalt. Romeo must not live.
I think she doth; and that's her cause of sorrow.
Prince Pericles,
Queen Mab, whats she?
My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that color.
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myselfAgainst their will. But who comes here?
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
Call me to your remembrances.
Good, and valiant.
Will you hear t again?
Thou art a villain!
The boy gives warning something doth approach.What cursèd foot wanders this way tonightTo cross my obsequies and true loves rite?
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Here, my lord.
Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast    Rideth a puissant navy. To our shores    Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,    Unarmed and unresolved to beat them back.    'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;    And there they hull, expecting but the aid    Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
Ill tell thee ere thou ask it me again.    I have been feasting with mine enemy,    Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,    Thats by me wounded.   Both our remedies    Within thy help and holy physic lies.    I bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo,    My intercession likewise steads my foe.
News, lads, Our wars are done!    The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks,    That their designment halts.   A noble ship of Venice    Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance    On most part of their fleet.
[To HORTENSIO]   Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatlywhat his mind is.   Why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses.   Why, nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.
I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt    spiritgive thee thy dueand one that knows what    belongs to reason;   and canst use the time well, if    the time use thee well: good parts in thee.
That you do think you are not what you are.
Soft, sir! One word more.     [   aside]     They are both in eithers powers, but this swift business    I must uneasy make lest too light winning    Make the prize light.     [To FERDINAND]     One word more. I charge thee    That thou attend me.   Thou dost here usurp    The name thou owest not, and hast put thyself    Upon this island as a spy to win it    From me, the lord on t.
The time hath been,    Would you have been so brief with him,   he would    Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,    For taking so the head, your whole head's length  .
Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?
Peace, Grumio. It is the rival of my love.Petruchio, stand by a while.
Never trust me, then. And by all means stir on the youth to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together.   For Andrew, if he were opened and you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, Ill eat the rest of the anatomy.
'Tis burnt, and so is all the meat.    What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?    How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser    And serve it thus to me that love it not?    There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all!    Throws the meat, & c. about the stage    You heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves!    What, do you grumble? Ill be with you straight.
No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
Thats strange.
Kind sister, thanks. Well enter all together.
O how that name befits my composition!    Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:    Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;    And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?    For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;    Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:    The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,    Is my strict fast; I mean, my children's looks;    And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:    Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,    Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.
In Orsinos bosom.
And you, sir.
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found itAnd I did give t my husband.
One Sir Andrew
What manner of man?
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.     [they move aside]     Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business    And finds the testy gentleman so hot    As he will lose his head ere give consent    His masters child, as worshipfully he terms it,    Shall lose the royalty of Englands throne.
Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus    Intend my travel, where I'll hear from thee;    And by whose letters I'll dispose myself.    The care I had and have of subjects' good    On thee I lay whose wisdom's strength can bear it.    I'll take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath:    Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both:    But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe,    That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince,    Thou show'dst a subject's shine, I a true prince.
How could that be?    Either thou art most ignorant by age,    Or thou wert born a fool.   Camillo's flight,    Added to their familiarity,    Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,    That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation    But only seeing, all other circumstances    Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:    Yet, for a greater confirmation,    For in an act of this importance 'twere    Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post    To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,    Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know    Of stuff'd sufficiency:   now from the oracle    They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,    Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?
Madam, this service I have done for you,    Though you respect not aught your servant doth,    To hazard life and rescue you from him    That would have forced your honour and your love;    Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look;    A smaller boon than this I cannot beg    And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.
I prithee, do so.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic sea,    Whose icy current and compulsive course    Ne'er keeps retiring ebb but keeps due on    To the Propontic and the Hellespont,    Even so my bloody thoughts with violent pace    Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love    Till that a capable and wide revenge    Swallow them up.   Now, by yon marble heaven,    In the due reverence of a sacred vow    I here engage my words.    (he kneels)
Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,He makes for England, here to claim the crown.
AEmilius, let the emperor give his pledgesUnto my father and my uncle Marcus,And we will come. March away.
How much money must I have?
What tellst thou me of robbing? This is Venice,My house is not a grange.
Draw, if you be men.Gregory, remember thy washing blow.
Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts.    Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,    Expedient manage must be made, my liege,    Ere further leisure yield them further means    For their advantage and your highness' loss.
Ha? Let me see her. Out, alas! Shes cold.    Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.    Life and these lips have long been separated.    Death lies on her like an untimely frost    Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
'Tis new to thee.
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
Why then methinks tis time to smile again.    O world, how apt the poor are to be proud!    If one should be a prey, how much the better    To fall before the lion than the wolf!
I did but crave.
We'll part the time between's then; and in thatI'll no gainsaying.
O Hermione,    As every present time doth boast itself    Above a better gone, so must thy grave    Give way to what's seen now!   Sir, you yourself    Have said and writ so, but your writing now    Is colder than that theme, 'She had not been,    Nor was not to be equall'd;'thus your verse    Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,    To say you have seen a better.
[Within]   Open the door, secure, foolhardy king:    Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?    Open the door, or I will break it open.
My brothers love, the devil, and my rage.
God-a-mercy, Grumio! Then he shall have no odds.
God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so, and kiss thyhand so oft?
Hast stolen it from her?
Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thougivest me,Not all thy counsel.
What dost thou think?
And in good time,Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the duke.
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!Pray you, a word.
It was, Andronicus.
Peace, children, peace. The king doth love you well.Incapable and shallow innocents,You cannot guess who caused your fathers death.
Come, let us go; and pray to all the godsFor our beloved mother in her pains.
Honor, riches, marriage, blessing,    Long continuance, and increasing,    Hourly joys be still upon you.    Juno sings her blessings on you.
We are not thieves, but men that much do want.
Ay, and this.
Ye're honest men: ye've heard that I have gold;I am sure you have: speak truth; ye're honest men.
Unless I have mista'en his colors much,    Which well I am assured I have not done,    His regiment lies half a mile, at least,    South from the mighty power of the king.
Traffic's thy god; and thy god confound thee!
He'll stay my lord.
Most noble sir,    That which I shall report will bear no credit,    Were not the proof so nigh.   Please you, great sir,    Bohemia greets you from himself by me;    Desires you to attach his son,   who has    His dignity and duty both cast off    Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with    A shepherd's daughter.
If I hope well, I'll never see thee more.
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:every lane's end, every shop, church, session,hanging, yields a careful man work.
If partially affined or leagued in officeThou dost deliver more or less than truthThou art no soldier.
That deaths unnatural that kills for loving.    Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?    Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.    These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope    They do not point on me.
Wrong not her birth. She is a royal princess.
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
I am not weary, and tis long to night:    I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes    With the memorials and the things of fame    That do renown this city.
He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he haspaid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
An it had not fallen flat-long.
Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of MilanAnd his brave son being twain.
On pain of death, no person be so bold    Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,    Except the marshal and such officers    Appointed to direct these fair designs.
A maiden never bold,    Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion    Blushed at herself. And she, in spite of nature,    Of years, of country, credit, everything,    To fall in love with what she feared to look on?    It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect    That will confess perfection so could err.    Against all rules of nature,   and must be driven    To find out practices of cunning hell    Why this should be.   I therefore vouch again    That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood    Or with some dram, conjured to this effect,    He wrought upon her.
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue    Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.    In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted,    I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length,    That reacheth from the restful English court    As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'    Amongst much other talk, that very time,    I heard you say that you had rather refuse    The offer of an hundred thousand crowns    Than Bolingbroke's return to England;    Adding withal how blest this land would be    In this your cousin's death.
There is a sicknessWhich puts some of us in distemper, butI cannot name the disease; and it is caughtOf you that yet are well.
Sir, you are music's master.
Nay, this was but his dream.
Of sorrow or of joy?
[reads]  With a trunk sleeve
And, madam,I must be present at your conference.
As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;    But as I come, I come for Lancaster.    And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace    Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:    You are my father, for methinks in you    I see old Gaunt alive;   O, then, my father,    Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd    A wandering vagabond;     my rights and royalties    Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away    To upstart unthrifts?   Wherefore was I born?    If that my cousin king be King of England,    It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.    You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;    Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,    He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,    To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.    I am denied to sue my livery here,    And yet my letters-patents give me leave:    My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold,    And these and all are all amiss employ'd.    What would you have me do?   I am a subject,    And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me;    And therefore, personally I lay my claim    To my inheritance of free descent.
Thou liest.
Not?
Nay, let's seek him:Then do we sin against our own estate,When we may profit meet, and come too late.
No, my lord, not I.
Past the mid season.
So many miseries have crazed my voiceThat my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
When will he be here?
Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I canplace thee, I will.
Most radiant, exquisite and unmatchable beautyI pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house, for I never saw her.   I would be loath to cast away my speech, for besides that it is excellently well penned, I have taken great pains to con it.   Good beauties, let me sustain no scorn.   I am very comptible, even to the leastsinister usage.
What misadventure is so early upThat calls our person from our morning rest?
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.
(picks up the handkerchief)     I am glad I have found this napkin,    This was her first remembrance from the Moor.    My wayward husband hath a hundred times    Wooed me to steal it, but she so loves the token    (For he conjured her she should ever keep it)    That she reserves it evermore about her    To kiss and talk to. Ill have the work ta'en out    And give t Iago.   What he will do with it    Heaven knows, not I.    I nothing but to please his fantasy.
But now the blood of twenty thousand men    Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;    And, till so much blood thither come again,    Have I not reason to look pale and dead?    All souls that will be safe fly from my side,    For time hath set a blot upon my pride.
Sir, that's to-morrow.    I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance    Or breed upon our absence;   that may blow    No sneaking winds at home, to make us say    'This is put forth too truly:'   besides, I have stay'd    To tire your royalty.
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,Shell find a white that shall her blackness fit.
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared;    The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.    Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care    And what loss is it to be rid of care?    Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?    Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,    We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so:    Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend;    They break their faith to God as well as us:    Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:    The worst is death, and death will have his day.
'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king:    For when I was a king, my flatterers    Were then but subjects;   being now a subject,    I have a king here to my flatterer.    Being so great, I have no need to beg.
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'life, for then we are sure they are true.
Here, sir; what is your pleasure?
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.    My child? away with't!   Even thou, that hast    A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence    And see it instantly consumed with fire;    Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:    Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,    And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life,    With what thou else call'st thine.   If thou refuse    And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;    The bastard brains with these my proper hands    Shall I dash out.   Go, take it to the fire;    For thou set'st on thy wife.
Am I that name, Iago?
I cannot blame her. By Gods holy mother, She hath had too much wrong, and I repentMy part thereof that I have done to her.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps    Esteem   as foil wherein thou art to set    The precious jewel of thy home return.
Hastings and Edwards children, Grey and Rivers,    Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward,    Vaughan, and all that have miscarrièd    By underhand, corrupted, foul injustice,    If that your moody, discontented souls    Do through the clouds behold this present hour,    Even for revenge mock my destruction.    This is All Souls' Day, fellow, is it not?
And I wish, my liege,You had only in your silent judgment tried it,Without more overture.
Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?
No wonder, sir,But certainly a maid.
Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him;    There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food;    If any one relieves or pities him,    For the offence he dies. This is our doom:    Some stay to see him fasten'd in the earth.
(  aside  ) And O shall end, I hope.
Come, come, dispatch. 'Tis bootless to exclaim.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!O courteous Tybalt! Honest gentleman!That ever I should live to see thee dead.
Look, look. O heavy day!
These fifteen years! By my fay, a goodly nap. But did I never speak of all that time?
Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not hear a foot fall. We now are near his cell.
Faith, I know not what to say.
You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome,    By uproar sever'd, like a flight of fowl    Scatter'd by winds and high tempestuous gusts,    O, let me teach you how to knit again    This scatter'd corn into one mutual sheaf,    These broken limbs again into one body;    Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,    And she whom mighty kingdoms court'sy to,    Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,    Do shameful execution on herself.    But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,    Grave witnesses of true experience,    Cannot induce you to attend my words,     [To Lucius]     Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor,    When with his solemn tongue he did discourse    To love-sick Dido's sad attending ear    The story of that baleful burning night    When subtle Greeks surprised King Priam's Troy,    Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears,    Or who hath brought the fatal engine in    That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.    My heart is not compact of flint nor steel;    Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,    But floods of tears will drown my oratory,    And break my utterance, even in the time    When it should move you to attend me most,    Lending your kind commiseration.    Here is a captain, let him tell the tale;    Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.
Come, go with me into mine armoury;    Lucius, I'll fit thee; and withal, my boy,    Shalt carry from me to the empress' sons    Presents that I intend to send them both:    Come, come; thou'lt do thy message, wilt thou not?
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,Unfit for mine own purposes.
An armour, friends! I pray you, let me see it.    Thanks, fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses,    Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself;    And though it was mine own, part of my heritage,    Which my dead father did bequeath to me.    With this strict charge, even as he left his life,    'Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield    Twixt me and death;'   and pointed to this brace;    'For that it saved me,   keep it; in like necessity    The which the gods protect thee from!   may    defend thee.'    It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it;    Till the rough seas, that spare not any man,    Took it in rage, though calm'd have given't again:    I thank thee for't: my shipwreck now's no ill,    Since I have here my father's gift in's will.
Ho, whos here?
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,    We lose it not, so long as we can smile.    He bears the sentence well that nothing bears    But the free comfort which from thence he hears.    But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow    That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.    These sentences to sugar or to gall,    Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.    But words are words. I never yet did hear    That the bruised heart was piercèd through the ears.    I humbly beseech you, proceed to th' affairs of state.
And, with thy shame, thy father's sorrow die!
Nothing, my lord, or ifI know not what.
Fetch Desdemona hither.
He did.
I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.
What stay had we but Clarence? And hes gone.
He is as horribly conceited of him, and pants and lookspale, as if a bear were at his heels.
This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture ofNobody.
How now, Malvolio?
Margaret.
Ay, good fool.
Thus high, by thy advice    And thy assistance is King Richard seated.    But shall we wear these glories for a day,    Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were,To an untirable and continuate goodness:He passes.
O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor    the commodity wages not with the danger:   therefore,    if in our youths we could pick up some pretty    estate, 'twere not amiss to keep our door hatched.    Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods    will be strong with us for giving over.
Ceremony was but devised at first    To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,    Recanting goodness, sorry ere 'tis shown;    But where there is true friendship, there needs none.    Pray, sit; more welcome are ye to my fortunes    Than my fortunes to me.
No, he doth but mistake the truth totally.
Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.
Say that again.    The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see:    'Tis very true, my grief lies all within;    And these external manners of laments    Are merely shadows to the unseen grief    That swells with silence in the tortured soul;    There lies the substance:   and I thank thee, king,    For thy great bounty, that not only givest    Me cause to wail but teachest me the way    How to lament the cause.   I'll beg one boon,    And then be gone and trouble you no more.    Shall I obtain it?
Here comes my noble gull-catcher.
O barbarous, beastly villains, like thyself!
You may;But bootless is your sight: he will not speak To any.
[as LUCENTIO]   'Tis some odd humor pricks him to this fashion,Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-appareled.
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,    And to make whores, a bawd. Hold up, you sluts,    Your aprons mountant:   you are not oathable,    Although, I know, you 'll swear, terribly swear    Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues    The immortal gods that hear you,   spare your oaths,    I'll trust to your conditions: be whores still;    And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,    Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up;    Let your close fire predominate his smoke,    And be no turncoats: yet may your pains, six months,    Be quite contrary:   and thatch your poor thin roofs    With burthens of the dead;some that were hang'd,    No matter:wear them, betray with them: whore still;    Paint till a horse may mire upon your face,    A pox of wrinkles!
He may command me as my sovereign,But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
Thy life hath it dishonored.
No; I will to Ireland to his majesty.    Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain,    We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.
May we not get access to her, my lord?
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
Ay, ay.
Now will I go to take some privy order    To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,    And to give order that no manner of person    Have any time recourse unto the princes.
I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,Or manage it to part these men with me.
She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.    Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!    I weep myself to think upon thy words.    Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this    For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lovest her.    Farewell.
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,    That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,    But rather loose her to an African,    Where she at least is banished from your eye,    Who hath cause to wet the grief on t.
Nay, nothing; all is said.    His tongue is now a stringless instrument;    Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
Why, sir, say if you had,Who takes offence at that would make me glad?
In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse.Therefore, for Gods sake, entertain good comfort And cheer his grace with quick and merry eyes.
No, my good lord; but Pluto sends you word,    If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall:    Marry, for Justice, she is so employ'd,    He thinks, with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else,    So that perforce you must needs stay a time.
But I hear no; they say my son of YorkHas almost overta'en him in his growth.
As thou    Wilt live, fly after:   and like an arrow shot    From a well-experienced archer hits the mark    His eye doth level at, so thou ne'er return    Unless thou say 'Prince Pericles is dead.'
So will I, Signior Gremio. But a word, I pray.  Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now upon advice, it toucheth us both, that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress  and be happy rivals in Biancas love, to labor and effect one thing specially.
The weary sun hath made a golden set,    And by the bright track of his fiery car,    Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow.    Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.    Give me some ink and paper in my tent;    Ill draw the form and model of our battle,    Limit each leader to his several charge,    And part in just proportion our small power.    My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,    And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.    The earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment    Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him,    And by the second hour in the morning    Desire the earl to see me in my tent.    Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me.    Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?
Here comes a messenger. What news?
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,    Both who he is and why he cometh hither    Thus plated in habiliments of war,    And formally, according to our law,    Depose him in the justice of his cause.
That's your superstition.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Be of good cheer, mother. How fares your Grace?
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantuas lawIs death to any he that utters them.
Sebastian is thy name? I like thee wellAnd will employ thee in some service presently.
And yet how nature, erring from itself
If I do not usurp myself, I am.
Lord Cerimon, my lord; this man,Through whom the gods have shown their power; that canFrom first to last resolve you.
What are we, Apemantus?
You charge me most unjustly.
The Duke does greet you, general,And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,Even on the instant.
O, let my sovereign turn away his face    And bid his ears a little while be deaf,    Till I have told this slander of his blood,    How God and good men hate so foul a liar.
Not to his fathers. I spoke with his man.
Here's the midwife's name to't, one MistressTale-porter, and five or six honest wives that werepresent. Why should I carry lies abroad?
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you withan iron wit and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.    [Sings]  When griping grief the heart doth wound    And doleful dumps the mind oppress,    Then music with her silver sound     [Speaks]   Why silver sound? Why music with her silversound? What say you, Simon Catling?
This is some monster of the isle with four legs who hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil should he learn our language? I will give him some relief if itbe but for that.   If I can recover him and keep him tameand get to Naples with him, hes a present for any emperor that ever trod on neats leather.
I will not.
It did, it did. Alas the day, it did.
Thou flatter'st misery.
Sir, my gracious lord,    To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:    O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,    The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured    With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,    Most goddess-like prank'd up:   but that our feasts    In every mess have folly and the feeders    Digest it with a custom, I should blush    To see you so attired, sworn, I think,    To show myself a glass.
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.
God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,To have some conference with your grace alone.
Yes, that I did, but that was but courtesy.
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter?    Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her!    For Ill refer me to all things of sense,    If she in chains of magic were not bound,    Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,    So opposite to marriage that she shunned    The wealthy curlèd darlings of our nation,    Would ever have, t' incur a general mock,    Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom    Of such a thing as thouto fear, not to delight.    Judge me the world if tis not gross in sense    That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,    Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals    That weakens motion. Ill have t disputed on.    'Tis probable and palpable to thinking.    I therefore apprehend and do attach thee    For an abuser of the world, a practicer    Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.    Lay hold upon him. If he do resist,    Subdue him at his peril!
Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.    Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold    Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:    O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,    That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!    Or, if misfortune miss the first career,    Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,    They may break his foaming courser's back,    And throw the rider headlong in the lists,    A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!    Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife    With her companion grief must end her life.
O, here isThe lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one!Is't not a goodly presence?
Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus:let's ha' some sport with 'em.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
I should so.    Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark    Her eye,   a   nd tell me for what dull part in't    You chose her;   then I'ld shriek, that even your ears    Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd    Should be 'Remember mine.'
John Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers,Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Before you can say Come and Go,    And breathe twice and cry So, so!    Each one, tripping on his toe,    Will be here with mop and mow.    Do you love me, master, no?
God give him joy!
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
What dost thou say, Iago?
'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.
Gentlemen, content ye. I am resolved.Go in, Bianca.
How does he love me?
Oh, most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say you, Cassio? Is he not a most profane and liberal counselor?
I will so. Whats the matter?
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,    That Lucentio indeed had Baptistas youngest daughter.    But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your masters, I advise    You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.    When I am alone, why then I am Tranio;    But in all places else, your master Lucentio.
I pray now, call her.Withdraw yourselves.
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
To sauce thy dishes.
Nor send you out o' th' way?
Wrench it open;Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense.
Give me the letter. I will look on it.  [Takes letter from BALTHASAR]  Where is the countys page, that raised the watch?Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
I did.
Why, so I did, but looked for no reply.O, let me make the period to my curse!
Where shall I meet you?
I.
To bed? Ay, sweetheart, and Ill come to thee.
Thats not the tune.
How now! How a dozen of virginities?
And me too, good Lord!
Ill be with thee betimes.
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!    If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,    I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,    And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,    And lies, and lies:   there is my bond of faith,    To tie thee to my strong correction.    As I intend to thrive in this new world,    Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:    Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say    That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men    To execute the noble duke at Calais.
Ursula, bring my picture here.    Go give your master this:   tell him from me,    One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,    Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
Hark, Tranio! Thou mayst hear Minerva speak.
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.Let's along.
Under yon yew trees lay thee all along,    Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground    So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,    Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,    But thou shalt hear it.   Whistle then to me,    As signal that thou hearst something approach.    Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
I know not, madam. 'Tis a fair young man, and well attended.
Renowned Lucius, from our troops I stray'd    To gaze upon a ruinous monastery;    And, as I earnestly did fix mine eye    Upon the wasted building, suddenly    I heard a child cry underneath a wall.    I made unto the noise; when soon I heard    The crying babe controll'd with this discourse:    'Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dam!    Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,    Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look,    Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor:    But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,    They never do beget a coal-black calf.    Peace, villain, peace!'even thus he rates    the babe,    'For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth;    Who, when he knows thou art the empress' babe,    Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.'    With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him,    Surprised him suddenly, and brought him hither,    To use as you think needful of the man.
Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!
Alack, for mercy!
[aside to SEBASTIAN]    Let it be tonight,    For now they are oppressed with travel.   They    Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance    As when they are fresh.
You will not own it.
O, then unfold the passion of my love,    Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith:    It shall become thee well to act my woes;    She will attend it better in thy youth    Than in a nuncios of more grave aspect.
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost. My grandam told me he was murdered there.
Who hath committed them?
'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.    How have I been behaved that he might stick    The smallst opinion on my least misuse?
Is not my lord seen yet?
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
I am very glad to see you, signior. Welcome to Cyprus.
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris, love?
[To VINCENTIO]  Why, how now, gentleman! Why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another mans name.
O, sir, I find her milder than she was;And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
[as LUCENTIO]  Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
My lords of England, let me tell you this:    I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs    And laboured all I could to do him right;    But in this kind to come, in braving arms,    Be his own carver and cut out his way,    To find out right with wrong, it may not be;    And you that do abet him in this kind    Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
I greet thy love    Not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous,    And will upon the instant put thee to t.    Within these three days let me hear thee say    That Cassios not alive.
I have been in such a pickle since I saw you last that,I fear me, will never out of my bones. I shall not fearflyblowing.
The swallow follows not summer more willing than weyour lordship.
[Aside]    That you are both decipher'd, that's the news,    For villains mark'd with rape.   May it please you,    My grandsire, well advised, hath sent by me    The goodliest weapons of his armoury    To gratify your honourable youth,    The hope of Rome; for so he bade me say;    And so I do, and with his gifts present    Your lordships,   that, whenever you have need,    You may be armed and appointed well:    And so I leave you both:     [Aside]     like bloody villains.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Run to my study.By and by!Gods will,What simpleness is this!I come, I come.
O, let those cities that of plenty's cup    And her prosperities so largely taste,    With their superfluous riots, hear these tears!    The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.    They were trained together in their childhoods; and    there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,    which cannot choose but branch now.   Since their    more mature dignities and royal necessities made    separation of their society,   their encounters,    though not personal, have been royally attorneyed    with interchange of gifts, letters, loving    embassies;   that they have seemed to be together,    though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and    embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed    winds.   The heavens continue their loves!
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,And do not call them bastards.
Never?
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?
With all my heart, sir.
As dissolute as desperate;   yet through both    I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years    May happily bring forth. But who comes here?
Cousin of Buckingham and sage, grave men,    Since you will buckle fortune on my back,    To bear her burden, whe'er I will or no,    I must have patience to endure the load;    But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach    Attend the sequel of your imposition,    Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me    From all the impure blots and stains thereof,    For God doth know, and you may partly see,    How far I am from the desire of this.
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ay, too well.
I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
It is my lord's.    That I was shipp'd at sea, I well remember,    Even on my eaning time;   but whether there    Deliver'd, by the holy gods,    I cannot rightly say.   But since King Pericles,    My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again,    A vestal livery will I take me to,    And never more have joy.
What stuff is this? How say you?    'Tis true, my brothers daughters Queen of Tunis,    So is she heir of Naples, twixt which regions    There is some space.
My lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom    Of good old Abraham!   Lords appellants,    Your differences shall all rest under gage    Till we assign you to your days of trial.
Prithee say true!
From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
I will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.
How now, mistress?
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter.
Heavens keep him from these beasts!For he is, sure, i' th' island.
Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face;    His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;    His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:    He prays but faintly and would be denied;    We pray with heart and soul and all beside:    His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;    Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:    His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;    Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.    Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have    That mercy which true prayer ought to have.
If at home, sir,    He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,    Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,    My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:    He makes a July's day short as December,    And with his varying childness cures in me    Thoughts that would thick my blood.
Oh, heaven have mercy on me!
Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened    Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.    Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts,    Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction.    No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt    Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,    To revel in the entrails of my lambs.    But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,    My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys    Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes,    And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death,    Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft,    Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
Tomorrow dinner, then?
It is, it is. Hie hence! Be gone, away!    It is the lark that sings so out of tune,    Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.    Some say the lark makes sweet division.    This doth not so, for she divideth us.    Some say the lark and loathèd toad change eyes.    Oh, now I would they had changed voices too,    Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,    Hunting thee hence with hunts-up to the day.    O, now be gone. More light and light it grows.
[aside]  A murd'rous villain, and so still thou art.
[to DORSET]     Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee.     [to ANNE]    Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee.     [to QUEEN ELIZABETH]     Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee.    I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me.    Eighty-odd years of sorrow have I seen,    And each hours joy wracked with a week of teen.
See where his Grace stands, tween two clergymen.
Yes.
Go then, for 'tis in vainTo seek him here that means not to be found.
Why, then All Souls' Day is my bodys doomsday.    This is the day which, in King Edwards time,    I wished might fall on me when I was found    False to his children and his wifes allies.    This is the day wherein I wished to fall    By the false faith of him who most I trusted.    This, this All Souls' Day to my fearful soul    Is the determined respite of my wrongs.    That high All-seer which I dallied with    Hath turned my feignèd prayer on my head    And given in earnest what I begged in jest.    Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men    To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms.    Thus Margarets curse falls heavy upon my neck:    When he, quoth she, shall split thy heart with sorrow,    Remember Margaret was a prophetess.    Come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame.    Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Ha?
What do ye ask of me, my friend?
Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have    something to do with you.   Come, you're a young    foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have    you.
To you as much, sir! I am beholding to you    For your sweet music this last night:   I do    Protest my ears were never better fed    With such delightful pleasing harmony.
I have.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.Tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.
Not to kill him, having a warrant, but to be damned for killing him, from the which no warrant can defend me.
I have one myself,Who shall not be more dear to my respectThan yours, my lord.
What, is the man lunatic?
Can the son's eye behold his father bleed?There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed!
I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms.
Why, with my lord, madam.
Zounds, hold your peace.
O slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
O, do ye read, my lord, what she hath writ?'Stuprum. Chiron. Demetrius.'
And so she did.
And too soon marred are those so early made.    Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she.    Shes the hopeful lady of my earth.    But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart.    My will to her consent is but a part.    An she agreed within her scope of choice,    Lies my consent and fair according voice.    This night I hold an old accustomed feast,    Whereto I have invited many a guest    Such as I love. And you among the store,    One more, most welcome, makes my number more.    At my poor house look to behold this night    Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.    Such comfort as do lusty young men feel    When well-appareled April on the heel    Of limping winter treads.   Even such delight    Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night    Inherit at my house.   Hear all, all see,    And like her most whose merit most shall be    Which on more view of many, mine, being one,    May stand in number, though in reckoning none,    Come, go with me.    [To PETER, giving him a paper]    Go, sirrah, trudge about    Through fair Verona. Find those persons out    Whose names are written there, and to them say    My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.    The king mine uncle is to blame for it.    God will revenge it, whom I will importune    With earnest prayers, all to that effect.
Like aqua vitae with a midwife.
Now, good sweet Nurse O Lord, why lookst thou sad?    Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.    If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news    By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!    Thou wast the prettiest babe that eer I nursed.    An I might live to see thee married once,    I have my wish.
Ill send her to you presently,    And Ill devise a mean to draw the Moor    Out of the way,   that your converse and business    May be more free.
With drinking healths to my niece. Ill drink to her aslong as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria.   Hes a coward and a coistrel that will not drink to my niece till his brains turn o' th' toe like aparish top.   What, wench!    Castiliano vulgo    , for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.
Who is the second that presents himself?
Thaliard, adieu!
Heres neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all. And another storm brewing, I hear it sing i' th'wind. Yond same black cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor.   If it should thunder as it did before, I know not where to hide my head. Yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls.    [sees CALIBAN]    What have we here? A man or a fish? Dead or alive? A fish.   He smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish-like smell, a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-john. A strange fish!   Were I in England now, as once I was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but would give a pieceof silver. There would this monster make a man. Any strange beast there makes a man.   When they will not givea doit to relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like arms!   Warm, o' my troth. I do now let loose my opinion, hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt.
So thrive I as I truly swear the like.
Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor!
As now she might have done,    So much to my good comfort, as it is    Now piercing to my soul.   O, thus she stood,    Even with such life of majesty, warm life,    As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her!    I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me    For being more stone than it?   O royal piece,    There's magic in thy majesty, which has    My evils conjured to remembrance and    From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,    Standing like stone with thee.
This, this: no more, you gods!   your present kindness    Makes my past miseries sports: you shall do well,    That on the touching of her lips I may    Melt and no more be seen.   O, come, be buried    A second time within these arms.
Tut man, one fire burns out anothers burning.    One pain is lessened by anothers anguish.    Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning.    One desperate grief cures with anothers languish.    Take thou some new infection to thy eye,    And the rank poison of the old will die.
Hark, a drum!
I swear.
Stephano!
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
The poorest service is repaid with thanks,And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
Whats he that follows here, that would not dance?
If it be so,We need no grave to bury honesty:There's not a grain of it the face to sweetenOf the whole dungy earth.
Well then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,    And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings    How he doth stand affected to our purpose    And summon him tomorrow to the Tower    To sit about the coronation.    If thou dost find him tractable to us,    Encourage him and show him all our reasons.    If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,    Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,    And give us notice of his inclination;    For we tomorrow hold divided councils,    Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.
O thou pernicious caitiff!How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchiefThat was my wifes?
Villain, I'll make thee safe.
And that you would have me to do!
Richmond? When last I was at Exeter,    The mayor in courtesy showed me the castle    And called it Rougemont,   at which name I started,    Because a bard of Ireland told me once    I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
And died that day when Viola from her birthHad numbered thirteen years.
[to STEPHANO and TRINCULO]  Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,As we are mock'd with art.
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt knowThe treason that my haste forbids me show.
Madam.
Hark you, sir, you mean not her to
Ay, I do.
[to STEPHANO]  Lo, how he mocks me! Wilt thou let him, my lord?
You    sunburnt sicklemen of August weary,    Come hither from the furrow and be merry.    Make holiday.   Your rye-straw hats put on,    And these fresh nymphs encounter every one    In country footing.
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot,    For then this land was famously enriched    With politic grave counsel; then the king    Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.
My name is Marina.
How should this grow?
The Moor! I know his trumpet.
Take her hence:    Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover:    I have too much believed mine own suspicion:    Beseech you, tenderly apply to her    Some remedies for life.    [Exeunt PAULINA and Ladies, with HERMIONE]    Apollo, pardon    My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!    I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,    New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,    Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;    For, being transported by my jealousies    To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose    Camillo for the minister to poison    My friend Polixenes:   which had been done,    But that the good mind of Camillo tardied    My swift command, though I with death and with    Reward did threaten and encourage him,    Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane    And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest    Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here,    Which you knew great, and to the hazard    Of all encertainties himself commended,    No richer than his honour:   how he glisters    Thorough my rust! and how his pity    Does my deeds make the blacker!
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl,    That flies her fortune when it follows her.    I'll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour    Than for the love of reckless Silvia.
Peter!
Away with the dotard! To the jail with him!
Ay, Biddy, come with me.   What, man! 'Tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan. Hang him, foulcollier!
The fitter, then, the gods should have her. Hereshe comes weeping for her only mistress' death.Thou art resolved?
I am about it, but indeed my invention    Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze,    It plucks out brains and all. But my Muse labors    And thus she is delivered:    If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,    The ones for use, the other useth it.
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
Go, write it in a martial hand. Be curst and brief. Itis no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full of invention.   Taunt him with the license of ink.   If thou thou-est him some thrice, it shall not be amiss; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper, althoughthe sheet were big enough for the bed of Ware in England, set 'em down.   Go, about it. Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no matter. About it.
Marry, that marry is the very themeI came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,How stands your disposition to be married?
Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in Othellos place.
Prithee, let him.
Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.    And I resign my gage.   My dear dear lord,    The purest treasure mortal times afford    Is spotless reputation: that away,    Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.    A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest    Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.    Mine honour is my life; both grow in one:    Take honour from me, and my life is done:    Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;    In that I live and for that will I die.
[aside]  Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!O my accursèd womb, the bed of death!A cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world, Whose unavoided eye is murderous.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.    Your officer Iago can inform you,    While I spare speech, which something now offends me,    Of all that I do know.   Nor know I aught    By me thats said or done amiss this night,    Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,    And to defend ourselves it be a sin    When violence assails us.
Doth your highness call?
Now be you blest for it!I'll to the queen: please you,come something nearer.
Why, a horse.
You told a lie, an odious, damnèd lie.    Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie.    She false with Cassio! Did you say with Cassio?
Well, let it strike.
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
No, for then we should be colliers.
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.You rise to play and go to bed to work.
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,    And piece the way out with a heavy heart.    Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,    Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief;    One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;    Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard Each syllable that breath made up between them.
Villains, forbear! we are the empress' sons.
Hang her! I do but say what she is. So delicate with her needle, an admirable musician. Oh, she will sing thesavageness out of a bear! Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!
O Thou, whose captain I account myself,    Look on my forces with a gracious eye.    Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,    That they may crush down with a heavy fall    The usurping helmets of our adversaries!    Make us thy ministers of chastisement,    That we may praise thee in the victory!    To thee I do commend my watchful soul,    Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes.    Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!     [Sleeps]
I am not sorry neither. Id have thee live,For in my sense tis happiness to die.
It touches you, my lord, as much as me.
Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men;Then, if thou grant'st thou'rt a man, I have forgot thee.
I have spoke the least:Besides, his expedition promisesPresent approach.
Thou dost advise meEven so as I mine own course have set down:I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.
True, too true, my lord:If, one by one, you wedded all the world,Or from the all that are took something good,To make a perfect woman, she you kill'dWould be unparallel'd.
Tongue-tied, our queen?speak you.
Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent
But, hark! a sail.
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady. Wouldtwere done.
Alas, who knows?
Do not rise yet.    Witness, you ever-burning lights above,    You elements that clip us round about,    Witness that here Iago doth give up    The execution of his wit, hands, heart,    To wronged Othellos service.   Let him command,    And to obey shall be in me remorse,    What bloody business ever.
This cannot anger him. Twould anger him    To raise a spirit in his mistress circle    Of some strange nature, letting it there stand    Till she had laid it and conjured it down.    That were some spite. My invocation    Is fair and honest. In his mistress name    I conjure only but to raise up him.
Thou'rt a scholar. Let us therefore eat and drink. Marian,I say! A stoup of wine!
Ay, that I am not thee.
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,You said that idle weeds are fast in growth.The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
She will not.
Hast thou, spirit,Performed to point the tempest that I bade thee?
A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard.
After I have done what I promised?
Sir,You speak a language that I understand not:My life stands in the level of your dreams,Which I'll lay down.
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will bejustified in our loves; for indeed
Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,    My advocation is not now in tune.    My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him    Were he in favor as in humor altered.    So help me every spirit sanctified    As I have spoken for you all my best    And stood within the blank of his displeasure    For my free speech.   You must awhile be patient.    What I can do I will, and more I will    Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.
Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house,     [To Attendants]       And hither hale that misbelieving Moor,    To be adjudged some direful slaughtering death,    As punishment for his most wicked life.
In troth, I think I should, and undo t when I had done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition.   But for the whole world? Why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? I should venture purgatory for t.
Pray heaven it beState matters, as you think, and no conceptionNor no jealous toy concerning you.
My lord so please you, these things further thought on,    To think me as well a sister as a wife,    One day shall crown the alliance on t, so please you,    Here at my house and at my proper cost.
No, no, my dream was lengthened after life.    O, then began the tempest to my soul.    I passed, methought, the melancholy flood,    With that sour ferryman which poets write of,    Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.    The first that there did greet my stranger-soul    Was my great father-in-law, renownèd Warwick,    Who cried aloud, What scourge for perjury    Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?    And so he vanished. Then came wand'ring by    A shadow like an angel, with bright hair    Dabbled in blood,   and he shrieked out aloud    "Clarence is comefalse, fleeting, perjured Clarence,    That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury.    Seize on him, furies. Take him unto torment."    With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends    Environed me and howled in mine ears    Such hideous cries that with the very noise    I trembling waked,   and for a season after    Could not believe but that I was in hell,    Such terrible impression made my dream.
What is thy news then?
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
Theres fire ready. And therefore, good Grumio, the news.
Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when thecourtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.
[as LITIO]   The base is right; tis the base knave that jars.    [aside]   How fiery and forward our pedant is!    Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.     Pedascule    , Ill watch you better yet.
Rapine and Murder; therefore called so,Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:    You may my glories and my state depose,    But not my griefs; still am I king of those.
Why, would that have mended my hair?
Have thy desire.
I pray you, sir, what is he?
Else I should tell him,well, i' faith I should,    When all's spent, he 'ld be cross'd then, an he could.    'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,    That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
Your beauty was the cause of that effect    Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep    To undertake the death of all the world,    So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
(returns)    My lord, I would I might entreat your honor    To scan this thing no farther. Leave it to time.    Although tis fit that Cassio have his place,    For sure, he fills it up with great ability,    Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,    You shall by that perceive him and his means.    Note if your lady strain his entertainment    With any strong or vehement importunity.    Much will be seen in that.   In the meantime,    Let me be thought too busy in my fears    As worthy cause I have to fear I am    And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.
Call it by what you will, the day is yours;    And here, I hope, is none that envies it.    In framing an artist, art hath thus decreed,    To make some good, but others to exceed;    And you are her labour'd scholar.   Come, queen o'    the feast,    For, daughter, so you are,   here take your place:    Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace.
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first,And then I know after who comes by the worst.
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me    this other day, because I was no gentleman born.    See you these clothes? say you see them not and    think me still no gentleman born:   you were best say    these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the    lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest, Hence will I to my ghostly sire's close cell,His help to crave, and my deap hap to tell.
If you say, I hope you will not kill me.
Why then, thou hast it. Two deep enemies,    Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleeps disturbers,    Are they that I would have thee deal upon.    Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither,For he was fitter for that place than earth.
When holy and devout religious menAre at their beads, tis much to draw them thence,So sweet is zealous contemplation.
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!White-livered runagate, what doth he there?
Ill back to the duke of Gloucester and tell him so.
[To ROMEO]  O thou untaught! What manners is in this,To press before thy father to a grave?
And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,Good prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go.
I am afraid, sir,Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
By the gods, I have not:    Never did thought of mine levy offence;    Nor never did my actions yet commence    A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.
Bonos dies, Sir Toby. For, as the old hermit of Prague,that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a niece of King Gorboduc, That that is is.   So I, being Master Parson, am Master Parson. For, what is that butthat, and is but is?
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,    And bow my knee before his majesty:    For Mowbray and myself are like two men    That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;    Then let us take a ceremonious leave    And loving farewell of our several friends.
But that I do not.
How do you, Malvolio?
Speak to me. I shall answer for her. Your will?
Would? Nay, and I will.
Stand by me, Lucius; do not fear thine aunt.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,Remembering how I love thy company.
Go off, I discard you. Let me enjoy my private. Go off.
How if fair and foolish?
Sure, my noble lord,    If she be so abandoned to her sorrow    As it is spoke   , she never will admit me.
Why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me.    I did but tell her she mistook her frets,    And bowed her hand to teach her fingering,    When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,    'Frets' call you these? quoth she. Ill fume with them!    And with that word she struck me on the head,    And through the instrument my pate made way,    And there I stood amazèd for a while    As on a pillory, looking through the lute,    While she did call me rascal fiddler    And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms,    As had she studied to misuse me so.
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wifeTo come to me forthwith.
Lie    there, my art.   Wipe thou thine eyes. Have comfort.    The direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched    The very virtue of compassion in thee,    I have with such provision in mine art    So safely ordered that there is no soul    No, not so much perdition as an hair    Betid to any creature in the vessel    Which thou heardst cry, which thou sawst sink. Sit down.    For thou must now know farther.
Ay.
Then show it me.
[as LUCENTIO]  Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?
Make that good.
A dollar.
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other,     gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat and the humor of forty fancies pricked in t for a feather.   A monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian footboy or a gentlemans lackey.
A false conclusion. I hate it as an unfilled can.   To be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is early, sothat to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes.   Does not our life consist of the four elements?
Well, forward, forward! Thus the bowl should run,And not unluckily against the bias.But, soft! Company is coming here.
Thou shalt be lord of it and Ill serve thee.
The like to you kind Varro.
Ay, she quickly pooped him; she made him roast-meatfor worms. But I'll go search the market.
Well hast thou lesson'd us; this shall we do.    But would it please thee, good Andronicus,    To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son,    Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,    And bid him come and banquet at thy house;    When he is here, even at thy solemn feast,    I will bring in the empress and her sons,    The emperor himself and all thy foes;    And at thy mercy shalt they stoop and kneel,    And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.    What says Andronicus to this device?
Madam, an hour before the worshipped sun    Peered forth the golden window of the east,    A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,    Where, underneath the grove of sycamore    That westward rooteth from this city side,    So early walking did I see your son.    Towards him I made, but he was ware of me    And stole into the covert of the wood.    I, measuring his affections by my own,    Which then most sought where most might not be found,    Being one too many by my weary self,    Pursued my humor not pursuing his,    And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.
Good sooth, even thus. Therefore, ha' done with words:    To me shes married, not unto my clothes.    Could I repair what she will wear in me    As I can change these poor accoutrements,    'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.    But what a fool am I to chat with you,    When I should bid good morrow to my bride    And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?Call forth the holy father.
You are gentlemen of brave mettle. You would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!
Ay, sir, they be ready. The oats have eaten the horses.
Ay, forsooth.
A noble duke, in natureAs in name.
No, good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer. Some mollification for your giant, sweet lady.
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;    Not like a corse;   or if, not to be buried,    But quick and in mine arms.   Come, take your flowers:    Methinks I play as I have seen them do    In Whitsun pastorals:   sure this robe of mine    Does change my disposition.
But is he often thus?
O, sir, let it not trouble you.
I do not understand.
Stars, stars,And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;I'll have no wife, Paulina.
We wait upon your Grace.
Unless another,As like Hermione as is her picture,Affront his eye.
Why, theres a wench! Come on and kiss me, Kate.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.Anon, good Nurse!Sweet Montague, be true.Stay but a little. I will come again.
An we do not, it is pity of our lives.
[Aside]     Too hot, too hot!    To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.    I have    tremor cordis    on me: my heart dances;    But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment    May a free face put on, derive a liberty    From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,    And well become the agent; 't may, I grant;    But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,    As now they are, and making practised smiles,    As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere    The mort o' the deer;   O, that is entertainment    My bosom likes not, nor my brows!   Mamillius,    Art thou my boy?
Now, by Saint Peters Church and Peter too,    He shall not make me there a joyful bride.    I wonder at this haste, that I must wed    Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.    I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,    I will not marry yet.   And when I do, I swear    It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,    Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
What stay had I but Edward? And hes gone.
[to MIRANDA]     Oh, if a virgin,    And your affection not gone forth,   Ill make you    The queen of Naples.
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm!    It is hypocrisy against the devil.    They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,    The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
What is itTo me, my father?
[sings]      Come unto these yellow sands,    And then take hands.    Curtsied when you have, and kissed    The wild waves whist.    Foot it featly here and there,    And, sweet sprites, bear    The burden. Hark, hark!
The son of Clarence have I pent up close,    His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,    The sons of Edward sleep in Abrahams bosom,    And Anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight.    Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims    At young Elizabeth, my brothers daughter,    And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,    To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
Saw you the king today, my lord of Derby?
Stand you awhile apart,    Confine yourself but in a patient list.    Whilst you were here o'erwhelmèd with your grief    A passion most resulting such a man    Cassio came hither. I shifted him away    And laid good scuses upon your ecstasy,    Bade him anon return and here speak with me,    The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,    And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns    That dwell in every region of his face.    For I will make him tell the tale anew    Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when    He hath, and is again to cope your wife.    I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,    Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,    And nothing of a man.
Honest, my lord?
Mates, maid? how mean you that? No mates for you Unless you were of gentler, milder mold.
What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?
As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.O you most potent gods! what's here? a corse!
Let me see your eyes.Look in my face.
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,    Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,    On pain to be found false and recreant,    To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,    A traitor to his God, his king and him;    And dares him to set forward to the fight.
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course    Is this of hers!   Lord Cardinal, will your Grace    Persuade the queen to send the duke of York    Unto his princely brother presently?    If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,    And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?
O heavens themselves!
What, think you we are Turks or infidels?    Or that we would, against the form of law,    Proceed thus rashly in the villains death,    But that the extreme peril of the case,    The peace of England and our persons' safety    Enforced us to this execution?
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread, thou thimble,    Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!    Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter cricket thou!    Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?    Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant,    Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard    As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livst!    I tell thee, I, that thou hast marred her gown.
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know. From this time forth I never will speak word.
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him,Of whence he is, his name and parentage.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
No, my good lord.
Lady, amen.
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
Why, your herb-woman; she that sets seeds and roots    of shame and iniquity.   O, you have heard something    of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious    wooing.   But I protest to thee, pretty one, my    authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly    upon thee.   Come, bring me to some private place:    come, come.
The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,Against thy entrance.
No, well reason with him.
Now, forward with your tale.Prithee, stand farther off.
I mean, she is brought a-bed.
How say you by this change?
Give me my veil. Come, throw it o'er my face.  [OLIVIA puts on a veil]  Well once more hear Orsinos embassy.
And wilt thou learn of me?
What is the matter?
I may, and will, if she be so contented.    She will be pleased.   Then wherefore should I doubt?    Hap what hap may, Ill roundly go about her.    It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
Why, this is not a boon,    'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,    Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,    Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit    To your own person.   Nay, when I have a suit    Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed    It shall be full of poise and difficult weight    And fearful to be granted.
Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.
Ay, sir.
I care not.
Why, very well then. You must not think then that I am drunk.
Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the image of it leaves him he must run mad.
I believe you;    Your honour and your goodness teach me to't,    Without your vows.   Till she be married, madam,    By bright Diana, whom we honour, all    Unscissor'd shall this hair of mine remain,    Though I show ill in't. So I take my leave.    Good madam, make me blessed in your care    In bringing up my child.
[To   FABIAN   ]  I have his horse to take up the quarrel. Ihave persuaded him the youths a devil.
Why, as I told thee, tis a custom with him,    I' th' afternoon to sleep. There thou mayst brain him,    Having first seized his books;   or with a log    Batter his skull; or paunch him with a stake;    Or cut his weasand with thy knife.   Remember    First to possess his books, for without them    Hes but a sot, as I am, nor hath not    One spirit to command. They all do hate him    As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.    He has brave utensilsfor so he calls them    Which when he has a house, hell deck withal.    And that most deeply to consider is    The beauty of his daughter.   He himself    Calls her a nonpareil. I never saw a woman,    But only Sycorax my dam and she.    But she as far surpasseth Sycorax    As greatst does least.
I am glad to see your honour in good health.
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
O this learning, what a thing it is!
My lord, good morrow. Good morrow, Catesby.You may jest on, but, by the Holy Rood,I do not like these several councils, I.
Boult, has she any qualities?
Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription ofthese letters: I know not which is which.
Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh    To think it should leave crying and say ay.    And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow    A bump as big as a young cockerels stone,    A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.    Yea, quoth my husband, Fallst upon thy face?    Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age.    Wilt thou not, Jule? It stinted and said ay.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,    On pain to be found false and recreant,    Both to defend himself and to approve    Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,    To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal;    Courageously and with a free desire    Attending but the signal to begin.
Think, my lord?
And in good time here the lieutenant comes.Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,How doth the prince and my young son of York?
O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ringto Madam Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths,    And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart.    How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!    O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!    Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me    Such an immodest raiment, if shame live    In a disguise of love:    It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,    Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
Five thousand mine.
Saddle my horse.God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
Do t, knight. Ill write thee a challenge. Or Ill deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
Still you keep o' the windy side of the law. Good.
Prithee, keep up thy quillets. Theres a poor piece of gold for thee. If the gentlewoman that attends the generals wife be stirring,   tell her theres one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. Wilt thou do this?
Good morrow, Katefor thats your name, I hear.
Nay, but say true, does it work upon him?
Now, fair befall thee, good Petruchio!    The wager thou hast won, and I will add    Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns,  Another dowry to another daughter,For she is changed as she had never been.
Sent by the king your father    To greet him and to give him comforts.   Sir,    The manner of your bearing towards him, with    What you as from your father shall deliver,    Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down:    The which shall point you forth at every sitting    What you must say; that he shall not perceive    But that you have your father's bosom there    And speak his very heart.
Chop off his head. Something we will determine.    And look when I am king,   claim thou of me    The earldom of Hereford,   and all the moveables    Whereof the king my brother was possessed.
It is not good to cross him; give him way.
Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints    With dry convulsions,   shorten up their sinews    With agèd cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them    Than pard or cat o' mountain.
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.
Accursèd and unquiet wrangling days,    How many of you have mine eyes beheld?    My husband lost his life to get the crown,    And often up and down my sons were tossed    For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss.    And being seated, and domestic broils    Clean overblown, themselves the conquerors    Make war upon themselves, brother to brother,    Blood to blood, self against self.   O, preposterous    And frantic outrage, end thy damnèd spleen,    Or let me die, to look on death no more.
Marry, will I. Kneel and repeat it. I will stand, and so shallTrinculo.
Now let me see if I can construe it.  Hic ibat Simois  , I know you not,  hic est Sigeia tellus  , I trust you not,  Hic steterat Priami  , take heed he hear us not,  regia  , presume not,  celsa   senis,  despair not.
Is it new and old too? How may that be?
[Reads]  Hermione is chaste;Polixenes blameless; Camillo a true subject; Leontesa jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten;and the king shall live without an heir, if thatwhich is lost be not found.
Oh, the people in the street cry Romeo,Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all runWith open outcry toward our monument.
Get you gone, sirrah.
Out, alas!    You'd be so lean, that blasts of January    Would blow you through and through.    Now, my fair'st friend,    I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might    Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,    That wear upon your virgin branches yet    Your maidenheads growing:   O Proserpina,    For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall    From Dis's waggon!   daffodils,    That come before the swallow dares, and take    The winds of March with beauty;   violets dim,    But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes    Or Cytherea's breath;   pale primroses    That die unmarried, ere they can behold    Bright Phoebus in his strengtha malady    Most incident to maids;   bold oxlips and    The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,    The flower-de-luce being one!   O, these I lack,    To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,    To strew him o'er and o'er!
Thy lips rot off!
Must it be so? it must not be. My lords,I do beseech you, know me.
Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head. If you provea mutineer, the next tree. The poor monsters my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.
I am sworn,And will dispatch.  [He seizes her]
Where is he?
I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.
Why, is he not with the queen?
Come, sir, your passado.
I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.
Cut my heart in sums.
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks. I would the fool were married to her grave!
We are tougher, brother,Than you can put us to't.
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage    That Norfolk lies:   here do I throw down this,    If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.
I do beseech you,    Send for the lady to the Sagittary,    And let her speak of me before her father.    If you do find me foul in her report    The trust, the office I do hold of you,    Not only take away, but let your sentence    Even fall upon my life.
Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from    thee:   yet for the outside of thy poverty we must    make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly,    thou must think there's a necessity in't,and    change garments with this gentleman:   though the    pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee,    there's some boot.
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Whats the matter with thee now?
You shall.
I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
Well, I will be so much a sinner, to be a double-dealer.Theres another. (  giving a coin  )
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards. This wide-chopped rascalwould thou mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!
I cry thee mercy, then, for I did thinkThat thou hadst called me all these bitter names.
[within]  If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear.Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.    If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,    We could at once put us in readiness    And take a lodging fit to entertain    Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.    But stay awhile. What company is this?
Courage enough: I do not fear the flaw;    It hath done to me the worst.   Yet, for the love    Of this poor infant, this fresh-new sea-farer,    I would it would be quiet.
'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call meknave. Begin, Fool. It begins Hold thy peace.
Cease; no more.You smell this business with a sense as coldAs is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel'tAs you feel doing thus; and see withalThe instruments that feel.
Grumio, my horse.
Know thus far forth:    By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune    (Now my dear lady) hath mine enemies    Brought to this shore.   And by my prescience    I find my zenith doth depend upon    A most auspicious star,   whose influence    If now I court not but omit, my fortunes    Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions.    Thou art inclined to sleep. 'Tis a good dullness,    And give it way. I know thou canst not choose.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
Zounds, who is there?
And shakes his threatening swordAgainst the walls of Athens.
They have here propertied me, keep me in darkness, sendministers to me   asses!and do all they can to face me out of my wits.
WhyDoth it not then our eyelids sink? I find notMyself disposed to sleep.
O, then I see you will part but with light gifts.In weightier things youll say a beggar nay.
The dignity of this act was worth the audience ofkings and princes; for by such was it acted.
[Draws his sword]   Draw, Benvolio. Beat down their weapons.    Gentlemen, for shame! Forbear this outrage.    Tybalt, Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath    Forbidden bandying in Verona streets.    Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.
I will do't; but yet she is a goodly creature.
Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.
Why, let her except, before excepted.
Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, wilt thou?Blow, and split thyself.
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
God give your Graces bothA happy and a joyful time of day.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,    For in Baptistas keep my treasure is.    He hath the jewel of my life in hold,    His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca,    And her withholds from me and other more,    Suitors to her and rivals in my love,    Supposing it a thing impossible,    For those defects I have before rehearsed,    That ever Katherina will be wooed.    Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,    That none shall have access unto Bianca    Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
[Returning]  His name is Romeo, and a Montague,The only son of your great enemy.
First, as you know, my house within the city    Is richly furnishèd with plate and gold,    Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;    My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry,    In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns,    In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,    Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,    Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl,    Valance of Venice gold in needlework,    Pewter and brass, and all things that belong    To house or housekeeping.   Then, at my farm    I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,    Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,    And all things answerable to this portion.    Myself am struck in years, I must confess,    And if I die tomorrow this is hers,    If whilst I live she will be only mine.
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive? How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear    That makes thee strangle thy propriety.    Fear not, Cesario.   Take thy fortunes up.    Be that thou knowst thou art, and then thou art    As great as that thou fearst.
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,    With clog of conscience and sour melancholy    Hath yielded up his body to the grave;    But here is Carlisle living, to abide    Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
(  seeing the letter  ) What employment have we here?
Alas, poor soul!
How this lord is follow'd!
I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though ignorance were as dark as hell.   And I say, there was never man thus abused.   I am no more mad than you are. Make the trial of it in any constant question.
Thou most lying slave,    Whom stripes may move, not kindness!   I have used thee,    Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee    In mine own cell till thou didst seek to violate    The honor of my child.
Hang him, he'll abuse us.
I do beseech you,    Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,    As, I confess, it is my natures plague    To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy    Shapes faults that are not,   that your wisdom,    From one that so imperfectly conceits,    Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble    Out of his scattering and unsure observance.    It were not for your quiet nor your good,    Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom    To let you know my thoughts.
What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir. See where he looks out of the window.
First, what is your place?
I think not so, my lord.
Good, good.
What was he that you followed with your sword? What hadhe done to you?
My lord,    Go then; and with a countenance as clear    As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia    And with your queen.   I am his cupbearer:    If from me he have wholesome beverage,    Account me not your servant.
My nyas?
Please it your lordship, he hath put me off    To the succession of new days this month:    My master is awaked by great occasion    To call upon his own, and humbly prays you    That with your other noble parts you'll suit    In giving him his right.
As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.
Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you,    Ift be your pleasure and most wise consent    (As partly I find it is) that your fair daughter    At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night    Transported with no worse nor better guard    But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,    To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor,    If this be known to you and your allowance,    We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.    But if you know not this my manners tell me    We have your wrong rebuke.   Do not believe    That, from the sense of all civility,    I thus would play and trifle with your reverence.    Your daughter (if you have not given her leave)    I say again, hath made a gross revolt,    Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes    In an extravagant and wheeling stranger    Of here and everywhere.   Straight satisfy yourself.    If she be in her chamber or your house,    Let loose on me the justice of the state    For thus deluding you.
My lord, you take us even at the best.
Theres nothing ill can dwell in such a temple.If the ill spirit have so fair a house,Good things will strive to dwell with t.
Is it upon record, or else reportedSuccessively from age to age, he built it?
[as LUCENTIO]  Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid! And come to Padua, careless of your life?
So,    They are well dispatch'd; now to my daughter's letter:    She tells me here, she'd wed the stranger knight,    Or never more to view nor day nor light.    'Tis well, mistress; your choice agrees with mine;    I like that well: nay, how absolute she's in't,    Not minding whether I dislike or no!    Well, I do commend her choice;    And will no longer have it be delay'd.    Soft! here he comes: I must dissemble it.
O bloody Richard! Miserable England,    I prophesy the fearfullst time to thee    That ever wretched age hath looked upon.    Come, lead me to the block. Bear him my head.    They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.
If that thy valour stand on sympathy,    There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:    By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,    I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it    That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.    If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest;    And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,    Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
Speakest thou from thy heart?
Why, now I see theres mettle in thee, and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than everbefore. Give me thy hand, Roderigo.   Thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy affair.
And then to have the humor of state, and after a demuretravel of regard,   telling them I know my place as I would they should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman Toby
No such matter, sir. I do live by the church; for I dolive at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.
Wherefore weep you?
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate    A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,    And then betwixt me and my married wife.    Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;    And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.    Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,    Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;    My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,    She came adorned hither like sweet May,    Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.
Will you deny me now?    Is t possible that my deserts to you    Can lack persuasion?   Do not tempt my misery,    Lest that it make me so unsound a man    As to upbraid you with those kindnesses    That I have done for you.
Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive.    And since you do profess to be a suitor,    You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,    To whom we all rest generally beholding.
Ill make one too.
A cause more promising    Than a wild dedication of yourselves    To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain    To miseries enough; no hope to help you,    But as you shake off one to take another;    Nothing so certain as your anchors, who    Do their best office, if they can but stay you    Where you'll be loath to be:   besides you know    Prosperity's the very bond of love,    Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together    Affliction alters.
Indeed?
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
[as CAMBIO]  Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait.  [aside]  And watch withal, for, but I be deceived,Our fine musician groweth amorous.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.    Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.    Give me a case to put my visage in!    A visor for a visor.   What care I    What curious eye doth cote deformities?    Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
I will not sup tonight. Give me some ink and paper.What, is my beaver easier than it was?And all my armor laid into my tent?
Go call him hither.
Sir, are not you my father?
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,    And both return back to their chairs again:    Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound    While we return these dukes what we decree.
Go, Cleomenes;Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange He thus should steal upon us.
My lord, I hear.
What shall I swear by?
What do you think?
Surrey, thou liest.
Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd?
What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
More welcome is the stroke of death to meThan Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.
Is it so brave a lass?
Oh, wonder!    How many goodly creatures are there here!    How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,    That has such people in t!
I have heard too much, and your words and performances are no kin together.
Hold your peaces.
Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath adaughter of most rare note: the report of her isextended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
[Picking his pocket]  Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. You ha' done mea charitable office.
Not in a grave,To lay one in, another out to have.
Put up your sword. If this young gentleman    Have done offence, I take the fault on me.    If you offend him, I for him defy you.
How, my pretty York? I prithee let me hear it.
Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate.Talkers are no good doers. Be assured We go to use our hands and not our tongues.
Sooth, but you must.    Say that some lady, as perhaps there is,    Hath for your love a great a pang of heart    As you have for Olivia.   You cannot love her.    You tell her so. Must she not then be answered?
That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.
Ay, ay. Oh, lay me by my mistress' side.
What is the matter with our cousin now?
You know me, Apemantus?
How came the noble Timon to this change?
I hope better.
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not. Let me go.
And I will follow, more for Silvia's loveThan hate of Eglamour that goes with her.
What a pestilent knave is this same!
Tell her, Emilia.I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from'tAs boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubtedI shall do good.
Why, then hell say we stabbed him sleeping.
Yea, yea, my lord. Ill yield him thee asleep,Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head.
This shall determine that.
My lord, I hear none.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,Being all this time abandoned from your bed.
Say on: an if it please me which thou speak'stThy child shall live, and I will see it nourish'd.
Your honor is most welcome.
[reads]  Thou killest me like a rogue and a villain.
Ay, ay, the cords.
Of Athens here, my lord.
All covered dishes!
Welcome, my lord! how far off lies your power?
What's her price, Boult?
I must confess your offer is the best,    And, let your father make her the assurance,    She is your own;   else, you must pardon me.    If you should die before him, wheres her dower?
Tut, fear not me.
I called thee then vain flourish of my fortune.    I called thee then poor shadow, painted queen,    The presentation of but what I was,    The flattering index of a direful pageant,    One heaved a-high, to be hurled down below,    A mother only mocked with two fair babes,    A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag    To be the aim of every dangerous shot,    A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble,    A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.    Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?    Where are thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?    Who sues and kneels and says God save the queen?    Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?    Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?    Decline all this, and see what now thou art:    For happy wife, a most distressèd widow;    For joyful mother, one that wails the name;    For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care;    For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;    For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me;    For she being feared of all, now fearing one;    For she commanding all, obeyed of none.    Thus hath the course of justice whirled about    And left thee but a very prey to time,    Having no more but thought of what thou wast    To torture thee the more, being what thou art.    Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not    Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?    Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke,    From which even here I slip my weary head    And leave the burthen of it all on thee.    Farewell, Yorks wife, and queen of sad mischance.    These English woes will make me smile in France.
Look to the boy.
By my troth, I would not undertake her in this company.Is that the meaning of accost?
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;go on the right hand: I will but look upon thehedge and follow you.
My husband!
Who should I swear by? thou believest no god:That granted, how canst thou believe an oath?
[to ALONSO]  Anddo you mark me, sir?
O God, I have an ill-divining soul.    Methinks I see thee now, thou art so low    As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.    Either my eyesight fails, or thou lookst pale.
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
Ha, banishment! Be merciful, say death,For exile hath more terror in his look,Much more than death. Do not say banishment.
[to FERDINAND]    Follow me.     [to MIRANDA]    Speak not you for him. Hes a traitor.     [to FERDINAND]    Come,    Ill manacle thy neck and feet together.    Seawater shalt thou drink.   Thy food shall be    The fresh-brook muscles, withered roots, and husks    Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe t.    That she loves him, tis apt and of great credit.    The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,    Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,    And I dare think hell prove to Desdemona    A most dear husband.   Now, I do love her too,    Not out of absolute lustthough peradventure    I stand accountant for as great a sin    But partly led to diet my revenge,    For that I do suspect the lusty Moor    Hath leaped into my seat.   The thought whereof    Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,    And nothing can or shall content my soul    Till I am evened with him, wife for wife.    Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor    At least into a jealousy so strong    That judgment cannot cure.   Which thing to do,    If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace    For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,    Ill have our Michael Cassio on the hip,    Abuse him to the Moor in the right garb    (For I fear Cassio with my night-cape too)    Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me    For making him egregiously an ass    And practicing upon his peace and quiet    Even to madness.   'Tis here, but yet confused.    Knaverys plain face is never seen till used.
Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me;Or else I'll call my brother back again,And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.
And why so, my lord?
What of his heart perceive you in his face By any livelihood he showed today?
'Tis a good form.
A match!
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.  [falls asleep]
Belike some noble gentleman that means,Traveling some journey, to repose him here.
Not a dump, we. Tis no time to play now.
Zounds! You rogue! You rascal!
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceitedfellow. Has he any unbraided wares?
Fair sir, and you, my merry mistress,    That with your strange encounter much amazed me,    My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,    And bound I am to Padua,   there to visit    A son of mine which long I have not seen.
A beggar, brother?
Yes, if you love me, sir.
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.
Hail, most royal sir!
You have not been abed, then?
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby    Am I;   who ready here do stand in arms,    To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,    In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,    That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,    To God of heaven, King Richard and to me;    And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!
My prettiest Perdita!    But O, the thorns we stand upon!   Camillo,    Preserver of my father, now of me,    The medicine of our house, how shall we do?    We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son,    Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years    Hath not yet dived into the worlds deceit;    Nor more can you distinguish of a man    Than of his outward show, which, God He knows,    Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.    Those uncles which you want were dangerous.    Your Grace attended to their sugared words    But looked not on the poison of their hearts.    God keep you from them, and from such false friends.
Go, take him away, and hang him presently.
What trade, sir?
And whats the news, good cousin Lodovico?
[as LUCENTIO]   Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.    Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?    Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer.    Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.
Tell out my blood.
What, canst thou say all this, and never blush?
And so do I too, lieutenant.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Say on, my loving lord.
He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side,    But in conclusion put strange speech upon me.    I know not what twas but distraction.
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,    As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth    Controlling majesty:   alack, alack, for woe,    That any harm should stain so fair a show!
First, know my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.
Fortune speed us!Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.
No, but she let it drop by negligenceAnd, to th' advantage, I being here, took t up.Look, here it is.
If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on    To castigate thy pride, 'twere well: but thou    Dost it enforcedly; thou'ldst courtier be again,    Wert thou not beggar.   Willing misery    Outlives encertain pomp, is crown'd before:    The one is filling still, never complete;    The other, at high wish: best state, contentless,    Hath a distracted and most wretched being,    Worse than the worst, content.    Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.
Tell him he shall not speak with me.
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean togive thee none.
My commissionIs not to reason of the deed, but do it.
Why, sir, her names a word, and to dally with that word might make my sister wanton.   But, indeed, words arevery rascals since bonds disgraced them.
Great king,    Few love to hear the sins they love to act;    'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.    Who has a book of all that monarchs do,    He's more secure to keep it shut than shown:    For vice repeated is like the wandering wind.    Blows dust in other's eyes, to spread itself;    And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,    The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear:    To stop the air would hurt them.   The blind mole casts    Copp'd hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throng'd    By man's oppression; and the poor worm doth die for't.    Kings are earth's gods; in vice their law's their will;    And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill?    It is enough you know; and it is fit,    What being more known grows worse, to smother it.    All love the womb that their first being bred,    Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
Will't please you eat? will't please yourhighness feed?
No, forbear.    The lethargy must have his quiet course.    If not, he foams at mouth and by and by    Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.    Do you withdraw yourself a little while,    He will recover straight. When he is gone    I would on great occasion speak with you.
No, no, my lord.
What sayest thou, Biondello?
Mistake no more. I am not Litio,    Nor a musician as I seem to be,    But one that scorn to live in this disguise    For such a one as leaves a gentleman    And makes a god of such a cullion.    Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.
Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived,    Signior Baptista may remember me,    Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,    Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
Come, bring in all together.
O, make for Tarsus!    There will I visit Cleon, for the babe    Cannot hold out to Tyrus:   there I'll leave it    At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner:    I'll bring the body presently.
But as well? Then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits than a fool.
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery;    That see I by our faces; we are fellows still,    Serving alike in sorrow:   leak'd is our bark,    And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,    Hearing the surges threat: we must all part    Into this sea of air.
There is besides in Roderigos letter    How he upbraids Iago, that he made him    Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came    That I was cast.   And even but now he spake,    After long seeming deadIago hurt him,    Iago set him on.
His word is more than the miraculous harp. He hath raised the wall and houses too.
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,    Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.    What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?
Farewell, my Desdemona. Ill come to thee straight.
If it be not for some purpose of import,Give t me again. Poor lady, shell run madWhen she shall lack it.
Here's ado,To lock up honesty and honour fromThe access of gentle visitors!Is't lawful, pray you,To see her women? any of them? Emilia?
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Be not acknown on t,I have use for it. Go, leave me.
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too,For they that were your enemies are hisAnd have prevailed as much on him as you.
I will, my lord.
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
Something, sure, of state,    Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice    Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,    Hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases    Mens natures wrangle with inferior things,    Though great ones are their object.   'Tis even so,    For let our finger ache and it endues    Our other healthful members even to that sense    Of pain.   Nay, we must think men are not gods,    Nor of them look for such observances    As fit the bridal.   Beshrew me much, Emilia,    I was, unhandsome warrior as I am,    Arraigning his unkindness with my soul,    But now I find I had suborned the witness,    And hes indicted falsely.
My lord, in the base court he doth attendTo speak with you; may it please you to come down.
Close by, my master.
Ye say honestly. Rest you merry.
[to RICHARD]    Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,    And in a bloody battle end thy days.    Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die!     [to RICHMOND]    Quiet, untroubled soul, awake, awake.    Arm, fight, and conquer for fair Englands sake.
You gods, reward them!    Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows    Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:    Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows;    'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;    And nature, as it grows again toward earth,    Is fashion'd for the journey, dull and heavy.
The sun will not be seen today.    The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.    I would these dewy tears were from the ground.    Not shine today? Why, what is that to me    More than to Richmond, for the selfsame heaven    That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used. Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
Or as twere perfumed by a fen.
There will little learning die then, that day thou    art hanged.   This is to Lord Timon; this to    Alcibiades. Go; thou wast born a bastard, and thou't    die a bawd.
I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love,    wherein by the color of his beard, the shape of his leg,the manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and complexion, he shall find himself most feelingly personated.   I can write very like my lady yourniece: on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands.
No matter what; he's poor, and that's revenge    enough.   Who can speak broader than he that has no    house to put his head in? such may rail against    great buildings.
Is t so saucy?
(aside to RODERIGO)  Away, I say, go out, and cry a mutiny.
[aside]  And that his bags shall prove.
Good, good, the justice of it pleases! Very good!
Hes that he is. I may not breathe my censureWhat he might be. If what he might he is not,I would to heaven he were!
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.
Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes    Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:    Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.    Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.
So, so, my lord.
Have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.
[coming forward]  My lord?
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender    Of my childs love. I think she will be ruled    In all respects by me.   Nay, more, I doubt it not.    Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.    Acquaint her here of my son Paris love,    And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next    But, soft! What day is this?
I have a jewel here
Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy.    Then take him up and manage well the jest.    Carry him gently to my fairest chamber    And hang it round with all my wanton pictures.    Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters    And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet.    Procure me music ready when he wakes,    To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound.    And if he chance to speak, be ready straight    And with a low submissive reverence    Say, What is it your Honor will command?    Let one attend him with a silver basin    Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers,    Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,    And say, Will t please your Lordship cool your hands?    Someone be ready with a costly suit    And ask him what apparel he will wear.    Another tell him of his hounds and horse,    And that his lady mourns at his disease.    Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,    And when he says he is, say that he dreams,    For he is nothing but a mighty lord.    This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs.    It will be pastime passing excellent    If it be husbanded with modesty.
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to layon thee, rather than have these off.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work, For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
Shes a most exquisite lady.
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,    I would my skill were subject to thy curse.    Here did she fall a tear; here in this place    I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:    Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,    In the remembrance of a weeping queen.
An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst never draw sword again.
I never knew a Florentine more kind and honest.
A bridegroom, say you? 'Tis a groom indeed,A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
But are they, Ariel, safe?
What is six winters? they are quickly gone.
Withdraw yourself awhile. Ill go with you.
How!
Nay, but he prated    And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms    Against your honor    That, with the little godliness I have,    I did full hard forbear him.   But I pray you, sir,    Are you fast married? Be assured of this:    That the Magnifico is much beloved    And hath in his effect a voice potential    As double as the Dukes.   He will divorce you,    Or put upon you what restraint and grievance    The law (with all his might to enforce it on)    Will give him cable.
How, how, Lychorida!
If he govern the country, you are bound to himindeed; but how honourable he is in that, I know not.
Why, I was writing of my epitaph;    it will be seen to-morrow:   my long sickness    Of health and living now begins to mend,    And nothing brings me all things.   Go, live still;    Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,    And last so long enough!
Return again, and take an oath with thee.    Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;    Swear by the duty that you owe to God    Our part therein we banish with yourselves    To keep the oath that we administer:    You never shall, so help you truth and God!    Embrace each other's love in banishment;    Nor never look upon each other's face;    Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile    This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;    Nor never by advised purpose meet    To plot, contrive, or complot any ill    'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.
I have done.    Yet, if my lord will marry,if you will, sir,    No remedy, but you will,give me the office    To choose you a queen:   she shall not be so young    As was your former; but she shall be such    As, walk'd your first queen's ghost,    it should take joy    To see her in your arms.
More pity that the eagle should be mewedWhile kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
What?
Hold, sir, or Ill throw your dagger o'er the house.
Marry, that with no man here he is offended,For were he, he had shown it in his looks.
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
[to FIRST MURDERER]  What shall we do?
[to ALONSO]  It is foul weather in us all, good sir,When you are cloudy.
Very brief, and to exceeding good senseless.
O dear father,Make not too rash a trial of him, forHes gentle and not fearful.
'Faith, some do, and some do not. But, mistress, ifI have bargained for the joint,
Go to, youre a dry fool. Ill no more of you. Besides, you grow dishonest.
'Tis very true.
Never in your life, I think, unless you see canary putme down.   Methinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian or an ordinary man has.   But I am a great eaterof beef, and I believe that does harm to my wit.
(  aside  ) Fire and brimstone!
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.
I mean, the Lord Protector.
Did Michael Cassio, when you wooed my lady,Know of your love?
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments hehas left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.
Not now, sweet Desdemona. Some other time.
And therefore do we what we are commanded.Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.Is he sure bound? look that you bind them fast.
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared tothat lord; he's ever sending: how shall I thankhim, thinkest thou? And what has he sent now?
That answer might have become Apemantus.
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Hark ye;The queen your mother rounds apace: we shallPresent our services to a fine new princeOne of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,If we would have you.
'Tis but fortune, all is fortune. Maria once told me she did affect me, and I have heard herself come thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion.   Besides, she uses me with a more exalted respect than anyone else that follows her. What should Ithink on t?
No, let me not.
I would I knew thy heart.
How    fares my gracious sir?    There are yet missing of your company    Some few odd lads that you remember not.
The emperor, in his rage, will doom her death.
Hes in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest.He shall taste of my bottle. If he have never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit.   If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will not take too much for him. He shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly.
Aye, sir.  [aside]  Ne'er a whit.
And have you mercy too! I never did    Offend you in my life,   never loved Cassio    But with such general warranty of heaven    As I might love. I never gave him token.
'Slight, will you make an ass o' me?
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds    That sees into the bottom of my grief?    O sweet my mother, cast me not away!    Delay this marriage for a month, a week.    Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed    In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Lord Lucius, and you princes of the Goths,    The Roman emperor greets you all by me;    And, for he understands you are in arms,    He craves a parley at your father's house,    Willing you to demand your hostages,    And they shall be immediately deliver'd.
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, tis enough. Where is my page?Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Is your man secret? Did you neer hear say,Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?    If it be so, out with it boldly, man;    Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
Worthy Camillo,What colour for my visitation shall IHold up before him?
Thou chidest me well:   proud Bolingbroke, I come    To change blows with thee for our day of doom.    This ague fit of fear is over-blown;    An easy task it is to win our own.    Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?    Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
Is not this strange?
That she was false to wedlock?
She is young and apt:Our own precedent passions do instruct usWhat levity's in youth.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
She is protectress of her honor too. May she give that?
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:    You are abused and by some putter-on    That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain,    I would land-damn him.   Be she honour-flaw'd,    I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven    The second and the third, nine, and some five;    If this prove true, they'll pay for't:    by mine honour,    I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see,    To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;    And I had rather glib myself than they    Should not produce fair issue.
Pourquoi,  my dear knight?
Sir, lend me your arm.
Prove that I cannot, take me home again,And prostitute me to the basest groomThat doth frequent your house.
[Aside]  I would I knew not why it should be slowed.Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Hark, hark! I hearThe strain of strutting chanticleerCry Cock-a-diddle-dow.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
O dear Diana,Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this?
Happy be you!All that you speak shows fair.
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do you think is his name?
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember wellThe very time Aumerle and you did talk.
Ay, Nurse, what of that? Both with an R.
A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.
I am none, by this good light.
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,    As I by friends am well advertisèd,    Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,    Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,    With many more confederates are in arms.
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.
The appellant in all duty greets your highness,And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
Is it true, think you?
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber. The day is broke. Be wary, look about.
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!    It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.    My back a t other side. Ah, my back, my back!    Beshrew your heart for sending me about,    To catch my death with jaunting up and down!
(  aside  ) Shall this fellow live?
Here comes the little villain.
I thank you, sir.
Thou dearest Perdita,    With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not    The mirth o' the feast.   Or I'll be thine, my fair,    Or not my father's. For I cannot be    Mine own, nor any thing to any, if    I be not thine.   To this I am most constant,    Though destiny say no.   Be merry, gentle;    Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing    That you behold the while.   Your guests are coming:    Lift up your countenance, as it were the day    Of celebration of that nuptial which    We two have sworn shall come.
This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing.
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood    Spurns down her late beloved, all his dependants    Which labour'd after him to the mountain's top    Even on their knees and hands, let him slip down,    Not one accompanying his declining foot.
Fairly offer'd.
I know not, madam.
Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand;We must needs dine together. Sir, your jewelHath suffer'd under praise.
Your lord does know my mind. I cannot love him.    Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,    Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth.    In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant;    And in dimension and the shape of nature    A gracious person.   But yet I cannot love him;    He might have took his answer long ago.
Many good morrows to my noble lord.
Not that I love you not.
Thy back, I prithee.
He is; and see, he brings the mayor along.
Theres no trust,    No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured,    All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.    Ah, wheres my man?Give me some aqua vitae.    These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.    Shame come to Romeo!
That you are well derived.
I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:    What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell;    But by bad courses may be understood    That their events can never fall out good.
No, by my life.    Privy to none of this.   How will this grieve you,    When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that    You thus have publish'd me!   Gentle my lord,    You scarce can right me throughly then to say    You did mistake.
[aside]    Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou    Performed, my Ariel. A grace it had, devouring.    Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated    In what thou hadst to say.   So with good life    And observation strange, my meaner ministers    Their several kinds have done.   My high charms work    And these mine enemies are all knit up    In their distractions.   They now are in my power,    And in these fits I leave them while I visit    Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned,    And his and mine loved darling.
Now, by heaven,    My blood begins my safer guides to rule,    And passion, having my best judgment collied,    Assays to lead the way.   If I once stir,    Or do but lift this arm, the best of you    Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know    How this foul rout began, who set it on,    And he that is approved in this offence,    Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth,    Shall lose me.   What, in a town of war    Yet wild, the peoples hearts brimful of fear,    To manage private and domestic quarrel?    In night, and on the court and guard of safety?    'Tis monstrous. Iago, who began t?
I thank your grace; the gift hath made me happy.    I now beseech you, for your daughter's sake,    To grant one boom that I shall ask of you.
Good aunt, stand up.
I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal.   I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool that has no more brain than a stone.   Look you now, hes out of his guard already. Unless you laughand minister occasion to him, he is gagged.   I protest Itake these wise men that crow so at these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.
I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow, gentle lady.
You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedicationTo the great lord.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,    My fair rose wither:   yet look up, behold,    That you in pity may dissolve to dew,    And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.    Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,    Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,    And not King Richard;   thou most beauteous inn,    Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,    When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
What is this? sport?
Petruchio, patience. I am Grumios pledge.    Why, this' a heavy chance twixt him and you,    Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.    And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale    Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
Hast thou not dropped from heaven?
[reads]  I will waylay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me
[to RICHARD]     Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife,    That never slept a quiet hour with thee,    Now fills thy sleep with perturbations.    Tomorrow, in the battle, think on me,    And fall thy edgeless sword: Despair and die!     [to RICHMOND]    Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep.    Dream of success and happy victory.    Thy adversarys wife doth pray for thee.
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.
[as LITIO]  For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.
Ay me, detested! How am I beguiled!
A thousand thousand!
[as LUCENTIO]  Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,By your firm promise. Gremio is outvied.
Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
Adieu, good neighbor.
I know her father, though I know not her,    And he knew my deceasèd father well.    I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her,    And therefore let me be thus bold with you    To give you over at this first encounter,    Unless you will accompany me thither.
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;    Compare dead happiness with living woe;    Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,    And he that slew them fouler than he is.  Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse.Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
Small joy have I in being Englands queen.
I never did thee harm.
Oh, twill be admirable!
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?Wherefore that box?
None that I more love than myself. You are a councilor.If you can command these elements to silence and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more.   Use your authority. If you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.   Cheerly, good hearts!   Out of our way, I say.
Nay, come, I prithee. Would thoudst be ruled by me!
Help, help, help!
By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts,These cates resist me, she but thought upon.
Dismiss me?
From heaven! alas, sir, I never came there God    forbid I should be so bold to press to heaven in my    young days.   Why, I am going with my pigeons to the    tribunal plebs, to take up a matter of brawl    betwixt my uncle and one of the emperial's men.
[within]  Ding-dong, bell.
[as LUCENTIO]  Call forth an officer.
[as VINCENTIO]  Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.
Ay.
But new struck nine.
Heres one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.
[Aside]    What's here?    A letter, that she loves the knight of Tyre!    'Tis the king's subtlety to have my life.    O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord,    A stranger and distressed gentleman,    That never aim'd so high to love your daughter,    But bent all offices to honour her.
The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you, and though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you.    You must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boist'rousexpedition.
Fear not my government.
What? what?
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes!
[to soldiers]    Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.    Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.    Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.    Ratcliffe.
Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward    Upon his party for the gain thereof;    And thereupon he sends you this good news,    That this same very day your enemies,    The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.
Be advised.
I ne'er heard yetThat any of these bolder vices wantedLess impudence to gainsay what they didThan to perform it first.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]      Comfort, dear mother. God is    much displeased    That you take with unthankfulness, his doing.    In common worldly things, tis called ungrateful    With dull unwillingness to repay a debt    Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;    Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,    For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
Think, my lord? Alas, thou echost me    As if there were some monster in thy thought    Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something.    I heard thee say even now thou likst not that    When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?    And when I told thee he was of my counsel    Of my whole course of wooing, thou criedst Indeed?    And didst contract and purse thy brow together    As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain    Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me    Show me thy thought.
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.
I do suspect I have done some offenseThat seems disgracious in the citys eye,And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
Brother, Ill go and bring it thee.
Here is a thing too young for such a place,    Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I    Am like to do:   take in your arms this piece    Of your dead queen.
Worse and worse. She will not come!    O vile, intolerable, not to be endured!    Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,    Say I command her to come to me.
Here, at your lordship's service.
Your honour has through Ephesus pour'd forth    Your charity, and hundreds call themselves    Your creatures, who by you have been restored:    And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even    Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon    Such strong renown as time shall ne'er decay.
Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and bornNot three hours' travel from this very place.
I bleed, sir, but not killed.
Well demanded, wench.    My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,    So dear the love my people bore me,   nor set    A mark so bloody on the business, but    With colors fairer painted their foul ends.    In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,    Bore us some leagues to sea, where they prepared    A rotten carcass of a butt, not rigged,    Nor tackle, sail, nor mast.   The very rats    Instinctively had quit it. There they hoist us    To cry to th' sea that roared to us,   to sigh    To th' winds whose pity, sighing back again,    Did us but loving wrong.
Lead, monster; well follow. I would I could see this taborer. He lays it on.
I did, my lord.
Soft! who comes here?
Carry me to the jail?
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.
But not, as I am, royal.
I learned it in England, where indeed they are most potent in potting. Your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied HollanderDrink, ho!are nothing to your English.
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselvesWere he the veriest antic in the world.
Let me entreat you.
And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.    If heaven have any grievous plague in store    Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,    O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe    And then hurl down their indignation    On thee, the troubler of the poor worlds peace.    The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul.    Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livst,    And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends.    No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,    Unless it be while some tormenting dream    Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.    Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog,    Thou was sealed in they nativity    The slave of nature and the son of hell,    Thou slander of they heavy mother's womb,    Thou loathed issue of they father's loins,    Thou rag of honor, thou detested
Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?
Oh, the more angel she,And you the blacker devil!
Who, he? I think the sun where he was bornDrew all such humors from him.
Prithee, tell me one thing first.
Then is he more beholding to you than I.
It is, my lord.
Your pardon, sir; for thisI'll blush you thanks.
I will not kiss thee; then the rot returnsTo thine own lips again.
Whither?
A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands, But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
To who?
Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate    Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature    Whom passion could not shake?   Whose solid virtue    The shot of accident nor dart of chance    Could neither graze nor pierce?
[as LUCENTIO]  'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
I will prove so, sir, to my power.
The watchdogs bark.
That they are out by lease.
Let us first see peace in Athens: there is no timeso miserable but a man may be true.
Which since you come too late of our intent,Yet witness what you hear we did intend.And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
Now, captain?
Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me,To be a torment to mine enemies?
You are welcome, sir.
Neighbors and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants    For to supply the places at the table,    You know there wants no junkets at the feast.    [To TRANIO]    Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegrooms place,    And let Bianca take her sisters room.
It is.
Marry, heaven forbid!
Vouchsafe my labour, and long live your lordship!
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.    Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.    I promised to enquire carefully    About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca,    And by good fortune I have lighted well    On this young man,   for learning and behavior    Fit for her turn, well read in poetry    And other booksgood ones, I warrant ye.
You have of these pedlars, that have more in themthan you'ld think, sister.
[as LUCENTIO]  Of all mad matches never was the like.
Its dry, sir.
I shall.
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
No, sir, it is legs and thighs. Let me see the caper.  [SIRANDREW dances]  Ha, higher! Ha, ha, excellent!
Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.
Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,    When time is broke and no proportion kept!    So is it in the music of men's lives.    And here have I the daintiness of ear    To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string;    But for the concord of my state and time    Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.    I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;    For now hath time made me his numbering clock:    My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar    Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,    Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,    Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.    Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is    Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart,    Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans    Show minutes, times, and hours:   but my time    Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,    While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock.    This music mads me; let it sound no more;    For though it have helped madmen to their wits,    In me it seems it will make wise men mad.    Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!    For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard    Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.
I dare not say he lies anywhere.
With me? and welcome: happy day, my lords.
So, this was well ask'd,'twas so well perform'd.    Come, sir;    Here is a lady that wants breathing too:    And I have heard, you knights of Tyre    Are excellent in making ladies trip;    And that their measures are as excellent.
Why, Apemantus?
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,    Which mannerly devotion shows in this,    For saints have hands that pilgrims hands do touch,    And palm to palm is holy palmers kiss.
How! a king's daughter?And call'd Marina?
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business. I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.
'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep.Hell watch the horologe a double setIf drink rock not his cradle.
I think so too.
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,Though I should swear I saw t. 'Tis very much.Make her amends, she weeps.
Do thy worst.This deed of thine is no more worthy heavenThan thou wast worthy her.
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,More free than he is jealous.
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap,
I am no feed post, lady. Keep your purse.    My master, not myself, lacks recompense.    Love make his heart of flint that you shall love,    And let your fervor, like my masters, be    Placed in contempt. Farewell, fair cruelty.
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
Ay, what of that?
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
Stay, I will go with you.
She may, my lord, for
Come, Grey. Come, Vaughan. Let us all embrace.  [They embrace]  Farewell until we meet in heaven.
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moeballads; we'll buy the other things anon.
What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,A bachelor, a handsome stripling too.I wis, your grandam had a worser match.
No matter, sinceThey have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs.Will t please you taste of what is here?
[To KATHERINE]  Say as he says, or we shall never go.
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
'Tis done by me, and ends in Margaret.
Honour, health, and compassion to the senate!
True, noble prince.
There is example for t. The lady of the Strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe.
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
What, to perverseness?   You, uncivil lady,    To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars    My soul the faithfullst off'rings have breathed out    That e'er devotion tendered   what shall I do?
My lord,Is this the daughter of a king?
Can anything be made of this?
The hart.
O, attend, my daughter:    Princes in this should live like gods above,    Who freely give to every one that comes    To honour them:    And princes not doing so are like to gnats,    Which make a sound, but kill'd are wonder'd at.    Therefore to make his entrance more sweet,    Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.
My kind Antonio,    I can no other answer make but thanks,    And thanks, and ever thanks.   And oft good turns    Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay.    But were my worth as is my conscience, firm,    You should find better dealing.   Whats to do?    Shall we go see the relics of this town?
Get you to bed on th' instant, I will be returnedForthwith. Dismiss your attendant there, look t be done.
Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.
Then, as you are as virtuous as fair,    Resolve your angry father, if my tongue    Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe    To any syllable that made love to you.
If I name thee.I'll beat thee, but I should infect my hands.
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill    Feign'd Fortune to be throned: the base o' the mount    Is rank'd with all deserts, all kind of natures,    That labour on the bosom of this sphere    To propagate their states:   amongst them all,    Whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd,    One do I personate of Lord Timon's frame,    Whom Fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her;    Whose present grace to present slaves and servants    Translates his rivals.
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,    Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,    Which was not half so beautiful and kind;    You have added worth unto 't and lustre,    And entertain'd me with mine own device;    I am to thank you for 't.
Why, hes a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
(sings)      I called my love false love but what said he then?        Sing willow, willow, willow.      If I court more women youll couch with more men     So, get thee gone, good night. Mine eyes do itch,    Doth that bode weeping?
Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long am I, at the least.   But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress,   whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon feel, to thy coldcomfort, for being slow in thy hot office?
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.
Are your doors locked?
Why, go to bed, and sleep.
Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the mouth too.
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.
[as VINCENTIO]  Swear, if thou darest.
But few,And those but mean.
I am not valiant neither,    But ever puny whipster gets my sword.    But why should honor outlive honesty?    Let it go all.
How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale?
How! have they denied him?    Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?    And does he send to me? Three? hum!    It shows but little love or judgment in him:    Must I be his last refuge!   His friends, like    physicians,    Thrive, give him over: must I take the cure upon me?    Has much disgraced me in't; I'm angry at him,    That might have known my place: I see no sense for't,    But his occasion might have woo'd me first;    For, in my conscience, I was the first man    That e'er received gift from him:    And does he think so backwardly of me now,    That I'll requite its last? No:    So it may prove an argument of laughter    To the rest, and 'mongst lords I be thought a fool.    I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum,    Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;    I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,    And with their faint reply this answer join;    Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.
No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten piethat is, something stale and hoar ere it be spent.    [Sings]     An old hare hoar,    And an old hare hoar,    Is very good meat in Lent.    But a hare that is hoar    Is too much for a score    When it hoars ere it be spent.     [He speaks]   Romeo, will you come to your fathers? Well to dinner, thither.
O bitter consequence    That Edward still should live true noble prince!    Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.    Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead,    And I would have it suddenly performed.    What sayest thou now? Speak suddenly. Be brief.
At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent    But, so it is, it is not.   Was this taken    By any understanding pate but thine?    For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in    More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,    But of the finer natures? by some severals    Of head-piece extraordinary?   lower messes    Perchance are to this business purblind? say.
Is thy name Tyrrel?
He's but a country gentleman;Has done no more than other knights have done;Has broken a staff or so; so let it pass.
I prithee, hear me speak.
[Aside]   Heaven, that I had thy head! he has found    the meaning:    But I will gloze with him.      Young prince of Tyre,    Though by the tenor of our strict edict,    Your exposition misinterpreting,    We might proceed to cancel of your days;    Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree    As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise:    Forty days longer we do respite you;    If by which time our secret be undone,    This mercy shows we'll joy in such a son:    And until then your entertain shall be    As doth befit our honour and your worth.
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!
The tears have got small victory by that,For it was bad enough before their spite.
Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my friends.
Gods bread! It makes me mad.    Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,    Alone, in company, still my care hath been    To have her matched.  And having now provided  A gentleman of noble parentage,    Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly trained,    Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts,    Proportioned as ones thought would wish a man    And then to have a wretched puling fool,    A whining mammet, in her fortunes tender,    To answer Ill not wed, I cannot love,    I am too young, I pray you, pardon me.    But, an you will not wed, Ill pardon you.    Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.    Look to t, think on t, I do not use to jest.    Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart, advise.    An you be mine, Ill give you to my friend.    An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,    For, by my soul, Ill neer acknowledge thee,    Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.    Trust to t, bethink you. Ill not be forsworn.
Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when weencountered: I hope it is not so low with him ashe made it seem in the trial of his several friends.
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,Thy father was the Duke of Milan andA prince of power.
Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz.   For hes in the third degree of drink, hes drowned. Go look after him.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
What promise, chuck?
Dishonourable boy!    That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,    That it shall render vengeance and revenge    Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie    In earth as quiet as thy father's skull:    In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;    Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
That shall be by and by. I remember the story.
Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits faints.
By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o' nights. Your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.
First, heaven be the record to my speech!    In the devotion of a subject's love,    Tendering the precious safety of my prince,    And free from other misbegotten hate,    Come I appellant to this princely presence.    Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,    And mark my greeting well; for what I speak    My body shall make good upon this earth,    Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.    Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,    Too good to be so and too bad to live,    Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,    The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.    Once more, the more to aggravate the note,    With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat;    And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,    What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.
I'll not put    The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;    No more than were I painted I would wish    This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore    Desire to breed by me.   Here's flowers for you;    Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;    The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun    And with him rises weeping:   these are flowers    Of middle summer, and I think they are given    To men of middle age. You're very welcome.
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no    milliner can so fit his customers with gloves:   he    has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without    bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate    burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump    her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,    as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into    the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'Whoop, do me    no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with    'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'
Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:As much good stay with thee as go with me!
We must both give and take, my loving lord.
Then I know thee not:I never had honest man about me, I; allI kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.
And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee    For false forswearing and for murder too.    Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight    In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
Error i' the bill, sir, error i' the bill! I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and that Ill prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
My name is Mary, sir.
[To  GREMIO  and  HORTENSIO  ]  Gentlemen, that I may soon make good What I have saidBianca, get you in,And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
Well wait upon your lordship.
E'en so thou outrunnest grace. Fool, I will go withyou to Lord Timon's.
Amen, with all my heart.
The more degenerate and base art thou,    To make such means for her as thou hast done    And leave her on such slight conditions.    Now, by the honour of my ancestry,    I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,    And think thee worthy of an empress' love:    Know then, I here forget all former griefs,    Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,    Plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit,    To which I thus subscribe:   Sir Valentine,    Thou art a gentleman and well derived;    Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserved her.
'Tis figured in my tongue.
Come to what is important in t. I forgive you the praise.
What wouldst thou, fellow? And how camst thou hither?
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
Out o' th' moon, I do assure thee. I was the man i themoon when time was.
Tomorrow, then, we will attend your Grace, And so most joyfully we take our leave.
Why, would not you?
I bless the timeWhen my good falcon made her flight acrossThy father's ground.
Alas, poor rogue, I think indeed she loves me.
Oh, thinkst thou we shall ever meet again?
It boots thee not to be compassionate:    After our sentence plaining comes too late.
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.
I see you what you are, you are too proud.    But, if you were the devil, you are fair.    My lord and master loves you. Oh, such love    Could be but recompensed though you were crowned    The nonpareil of beauty.
A sail, a sail!
[Falls]  Oh, I am slain! If thou be merciful, Open the tomb. Lay me with Juliet.
Myself.
Nay, my lords,
'Ods lifelings, here he is!You broke my head for nothing, and that that I did, I was set on to do t by Sir Toby.
'Tis better as it is.
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?    Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,    When I, thy three hours wife, have mangled it?    But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?    That villain cousin would have killed my husband.    Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring.    Your tributary drops belong to woe,    Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.    My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,    And Tybalts dead, that would have slain my husband.    All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?    Some word there was, worser than Tybalts death,    That murdered me. I would forget it fain,    But oh, it presses to my memory,    Like damnèd guilty deeds to sinners minds.    Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banishèd.    That banishèd, that one word banishèd    Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalts death    Was woe enough, if it had ended there.    Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship    And needly will be ranked with other griefs,    Why followed not, when she said Tybalts dead,    Thy father or thy mother, nay, or both,    Which modern lamentations might have moved?    But with a rearward following Tybalts death,    Romeo is banishèd. To speak that word,    Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,    All slain, all dead. Romeo is banishèd.    There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,    In that words death. No words can that woe sound. Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,The citizens are mum, say not a word.
Theres none so foul and foolish thereunto,But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
The gentleness of all the gods go with thee!    I have many enemies in Orsinos court,    Else would I very shortly see thee there.    But, come what may, I do adore thee so    That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Most heathenish and most gross!
Mine would, sir, were I human.
Feeling so the loss,Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper.   As I am a gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee for t.
O abominable!
Where be our men?
Hang, cur! Hang, you whoreson insolent noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.
The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard anew ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,if thou beest capable of things serious, thou mustknow the king is full of grief.
Here comes another troop to seek for you.
Is my lord angry?
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,    And tis my hope to end successfully.    My falcon now is sharp and passing empty,    And, till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged,    For then she never looks upon her lure.    Another way I have to man my haggard,    To make her come and know her keepers call.    That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites    That bate and beat and will not be obedient.    She ate no meat today, nor none shall eat.    Last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not.    As with the meat, some undeservèd fault    Ill find about the making of the bed,    And here Ill fling the pillow, there the bolster,    This way the coverlet, another way the sheets.    Ay, and amid this hurly I intend    That all is done in reverend care of her.    And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night,    And if she chance to nod Ill rail and brawl,    And with the clamor keep her still awake.    This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,    And thus Ill curb her mad and headstrong humor.    He that knows better how to tame a shrew,    Now let him speak; tis charity to show.
Was not my lordThe verier wag o' the two?
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
Oh, God i good een.
To the palace, an it like your worship.
Merry or sad shall't be?
Born in Verona, old Antonios son.My father dead, my fortune lives for me.And I do hope good days and long to see.
I pray thee, chide not. Her I love nowDoth grace for grace and love for love allow.The other did not so.
Whats the matter?
Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house,Whither I invite you. Look, Thaisa is recovered.
And thou unfit for any place but hell.
By whom, Camillo?
Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,    And bring our emperor gently in thy hand,    Lucius our emperor; for well I know    The common voice do cry it shall be so.
O, by no means,    Honest Ventidius; you mistake my love:    I gave it freely ever; and there's none    Can truly say he gives, if he receives:    If our betters play at that game, we must not dare    To imitate them; faults that are rich are fair.
He wrought better that made the painter; and yethe's but a filthy piece of work.
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?Sorry am I that our goodwill effectsBiancas grief.
I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.    I thought my mother and my brother York    Would long ere this have met us on the way.    Fie, what a slug is Hastings that he comes not    To tell us whether they will come or no!
Lavinia, wert thou thus surprised, sweet girl,    Ravish'd and wrong'd, as Philomela was,    Forced in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods? See, see!    Ay, such a place there is, where we did hunt    O, had we never, never hunted there!    Pattern'd by that the poet here describes,    By nature made for murders and for rapes.
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee
Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,    Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:    I take my leave before I have begun,    For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.    Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.    Lo, this is all:nay, yet depart not so;    Though this be all, do not so quickly go;    I shall remember more.   Bid himah, what?    With all good speed at Plashy visit me.    Alack, and what shall good old York there see    But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,    Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?    And what hear there for welcome but my groans?    Therefore commend me; let him not come there,    To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.    Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:    The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
How say you to that, Malvolio?
What dangerous action, stood it next to death,    Would I not undergo for one calm look!    O, 'tis the curse in love, and still approved,    When women cannot love where they're beloved!
Ha! is not that his steward muffled so?He goes away in a cloud: call him, call him.
Will t please your Lordship drink a cup of sack?
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.
There is none worthy,    Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods    Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;    For has not the divine Apollo said,    Is't not the tenor of his oracle,    That King Leontes shall not have an heir    Till his lost child be found?   which that it shall,    Is all as monstrous to our human reason    As my Antigonus to break his grave    And come again to me; who, on my life,    Did perish with the infant.   'Tis your counsel    My lord should to the heavens be contrary,    Oppose against their wills.    [To LEONTES]   Care not for issue;    The crown will find an heir:   great Alexander    Left his to the worthiest; so his successor    Was like to be the best.
No, madam.
My temple stands in Ephesus: hie thee thither,    And do upon mine altar sacrifice.    There, when my maiden priests are met together,    Before the people all,    Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife:    To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter's, call    And give them repetition to the life.    Or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe;    Do it, and happy; by my silver bow!    Awake, and tell thy dream.
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the    door, you would never dance again after a tabour and    pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you:   he sings    several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he    utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's    ears grew to his tunes.
It stands your grace upon to do him right.
I will acquit you.
I warrant you, sir, let me alone.
Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is a devil, and no monster. I will leave him. I have no long spoon.
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:    Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,    And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;    Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,    But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;    Thy word is current with him for my death,    But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,And cry, O Clarence, my unhappy son?
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood    To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,  Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:And if we be, how dare thy joints forgetTo pay their awful duty to our presence?If we be not, show us the hand of GodThat hath dismissed us from our stewardship;For well we know, no hand of blood and boneCan gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.And though you think that all, as you have done,Have torn their souls by turning them from us,And we are barren and bereft of friends;Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,Is mustering in his clouds on our behalfArmies of pestilence; and they shall strikeYour children yet unborn and unbegot,That lift your vassal hands against my headAnd threat the glory of my precious crown.Tell Bolingbrokefor yond methinks he standsThat every stride he makes upon my land  Is dangerous treason:   he is come to open  The purple testament of bleeding war;But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sonsShall ill become the flower of England's face,Change the complexion of her maid-pale peaceTo scarlet indignation and bedewHer pastures' grass with faithful English blood.
Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain, And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,Warm and new killed.
By and by, I come.To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief. Tomorrow will I send.
Alas! For whose sake did I that ill deed?    For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.    He sends you not to murder me for this,    For in that sin he is as deep as I.    If God will be avengèd for this deed,    O, know you yet He doth it publicly!    Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm;    He needs no indirect or lawless course    To cut off those that have offended Him.
Mens eyes were made to look and let them gaze. I will not budge for no mans pleasure, I.
Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Whats she?
How? The Duke in council?    In this time of the night? Bring him away.    Mines not an idle cause.   The Duke himself,    Or any of my brothers of the state,    Cannot but feel this wrong as twere their own.    For if such actions may have passage free,    Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.
Hail, royal prince!
No longer stay.
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
I tell thee, Kate, twas burnt and dried away.    And I expressly am forbid to touch it,    For it engenders choler, planteth anger;    And better twere that both of us did fast,    Since of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,    Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.    Be patient, tomorrow t shall be mended,    And, for this night, well fast for company.    Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him;    And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare    To follow this fair corse unto her grave.    The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.    Move them no more by crossing their high will.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.    Then weep no more. Ill send to one in Mantua,    Where that same banished runagate doth live,    Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram    That he shall soon keep Tybalt company.    And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
What raiment will your Honor wear today?
Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for him.   I frown the while, and perchance wind up watch,or play with mysome rich jewel.   Toby approaches, curtsies there to me
If 'twill not serve,'tis not so base as you;For you serve knaves.
Commend me to him: I will send his ransom;    And being enfranchised, bid him come to me.    'Tis not enough to help the feeble up,    But to support him after. Fare you well.
I told her so, my lord,On your displeasure's peril and on mine,She should not visit you.
That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I    fear, the angle that plucks our son thither.   Thou    shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not    appearing what we are, have some question with the    shepherd;   from whose simplicity I think it not    uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither.    Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and    lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
I grant it, for thine own, whate'er it be.
He is drunk now. Where had he wine?
[aside]   Oh, you are well tuned now,But Ill set down the pegs that make this music,As honest as I am.
What would you with her, sir?
Your presence glads our days: honour we love;For who hates honour hates the gods above.
And so they are. Alas, that they are so, To die even when they to perfection grow!
Oh, help me there!
My lord, what is your will?
Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.
Come you to make confession to this Father?
Be you his eunuch, and your mute Ill be.When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must; for yourbride goes to that with shame which is her way to gowith warrant.
It is a reeling world indeed, my lord,And I believe will never stand uprightTill Richard wear the garland of the realm.
Do you dare our anger?'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect;We banish thee for ever.
Most wonderful!
Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,    A huswife that by selling her desires    Buys herself bread and clothes.   It is a creature    That dotes on Cassio, as tis the strumpets plague    To beguile many and be beguiled by one.    He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain    From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.
He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that they come from my niece, and that shes in love with him.
Thou art like the harpy,Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel's face,Seize with thine eagle's talons.
When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt bewelcome. I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus.
'Tis like a coffin, sir.
Of neither, girl:    For of joy, being altogether wanting,    It doth remember me the more of sorrow;    Or if of grief, being altogether had,    It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:    For what I have I need not to repeat;    And what I want it boots not to complain.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.
Where is the duke my father with his power?
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day.    First were we sad, fearing you would not come,    Now sadder that you come so unprovided.    Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,    An eyesore to our solemn festival.
Contend not, sir; for we are gentlemenThat neither in our hearts nor outward eyesEnvy the great nor do the low despise.
Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish adog's death. Answer not; I am gone.
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
Whither?
[returning the blow]  Why, theres for thee, and there, and there. Are all the people mad?
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,Upon this ground; and more it would content meTo have her honour true than your suspicion,Be blamed for't how you might.
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talkon when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. Whatailest thou, man?
And joy comes well in such a needy time.What are they, beseech your ladyship?
[aside]  O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
Find thou the means, and Ill find such a man.But now Ill tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
A thing for me? It is a common thing
O, he's the very soul of bounty!
Beshrew me, the knights in admirable fooling.
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,    I should be arguing still upon that doubt.    But let it rest.Now, Litio, to you.    Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,    That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.
What profane wretch art thou?
[sings and helps to attire PROSPERO]    Where the bee sucks, there suck I.    In a cowslips bell I lie.    There I couch when owls do cry.    On the bats back I do fly    After summer merrily.    Merrily, merrily shall I live now    Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
A daughter?    O heavens, that they were living both in Naples,    The king and queen there!   That they were, I wish    Myself were mudded in that oozy bed    Where my son lies.When did you lose your daughter?
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged. Good Sir Topas,do not think I am mad. They have laid me here in hideous darkness.
Help! Help, ho, help! O lady, speak again!Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!
Why, at her fathers.
[to TRINCULO]  Do I so? Take thou that.  [beatsTRINCULO]  As you like this, give me the lie another time.
Does she love him?
La, la, la, la! 'nothing doubting,' says he? Alas,    good lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not    keep so good a house.   Many a time and often I ha'    dined with him, and told him on't, and come again to    supper to him, of purpose to have him spend less,    and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning    by my coming.   Every man has his fault, and honesty    is his: I ha' told him on't, but I could ne'er get    him from't.
[to ALONSO]  I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand youIn this strange stare?
My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
She says it is a fair one.
Thou sayest true; they're too unwholesome, o'    conscience.   The poor Transylvanian is dead, that    lay with the little baggage.
Ay, he.
It is not lost, but what and if it were?
O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine,    That laid the sentence of dread banishment    On yon proud man, should take it off again    With words of sooth!   O that I were as great    As is my grief, or lesser than my name!    Or that I could forget what I have been,    Or not remember what I must be now!    Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,    Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
Let me ask you one thing:What do you think of my daughter, sir?
[as VINCENTIO]   Soft son.    Sir, by your leave, having come to Padua    To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio    Made me acquainted with a weighty cause    Of love between your daughter and himself.    And, for the good report I hear of you    And for the love he beareth to your daughter    And she to him, to stay him not too long,    I am content, in a good fathers care,    To have him matched.   And if you please to like    No worse than I, upon some agreement    Me shall you find ready and willing    With one consent to have her so bestowed,    For curious I cannot be with you,    Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else. Thou knowst not me.
What if he had said widower Aeneas too? Good Lord, how you take it!
Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so, For I have bills for money by exchangeFrom Florence, and must here deliver them.
By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men that give fools money get themselves a good reportafterfourteen years' purchase.
Thou sun, that comfort'st, burn! Speak, and    be hang'd:    For each true word, a blister! and each false    Be as cauterizing to the root o' the tongue,    Consuming it with speaking!
Why, whats a moveable?
Alack, why am I sent for to a king,    Before I have shook off the regal thoughts    Wherewith I reign'd?   I hardly yet have learn'd    To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:    Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me    To this submission.   Yet I well remember    The favours of these men: were they not mine?    Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me?    So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,    Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none.    God save the king! Will no man say amen?    Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.    God save the king! although I be not he;    And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.    To do what service am I sent for hither?
My brother and thy uncle, called Antonio    I pray thee, mark me (that a brother should    Be so perfidious!)   he whom next thyself    Of all the world I loved and to him put    The manage of my state, as at that time    Through all the signories it was the first,    And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed    In dignity, and for the liberal arts    Without a parallel.   Those being all my study,    The government I cast upon my brother    And to my state grew stranger, being transported    And rapt in secret studies.   Thy false uncle    Dost thou attend me?
Thy mother was a piece of virtue and    She said thou wast my daughter.   And thy father    Was Duke of Milan, and thou his only heir    And princess no worse issued.
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
Cursed be that heart that forced us to this shift!    Write thou good niece; and here display, at last,    What God will have discover'd for revenge;    Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,    That we may know the traitors and the truth!
I fear too early, for my mind misgives    Some consequence yet hanging in the stars    Shall bitterly begin his fearful date    With this nights revels, and expire the term    Of a despisèd life closed in my breast    By some vile forfeit of untimely death.    But he that hath the steerage of my course,    Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.
She says enough, yet shes a simple bawd    That cannot say as much.   This is a subtle whore,    A closet, lock and key, of villainous secrets.    And yet shell kneel and pray, I have seen her do t.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stayTo hear true shrift.Come, madam, lets away.
Even by my god I swear to thee I will.
Oh, help!
I know it is the moon.
O excellent motion! Fellows, lets be gone.
Pray you, chuck, come hither.
Is t possible?
Go to, go to.    You are a saucy boy. Is t so, indeed?    This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what.    You must contrary me. Marry, tis time.    Well said, my hearts!   You are a princox, go.    Be quiet, or   More light, more light!   For shame!    Ill make you quiet.   What, cheerly, my hearts!
O, gentlemen, see, see dead Henrys wounds    Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!    Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity,    For tis thy presence that exhales this blood    From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells.      Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural,    Provokes this deluge most unnatural.    O God, which this blood madst, revenge his death!    O earth, which this blood drinkst revenge his death!    Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead,    Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick,    As thou dost swallow up this good kings blood,    Which his hell-governed arm hath butcherèd!
[aside]  He will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
My lord.
To bear with patienceSuch griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself.
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast!
Stays here longer.
How! caught of me!    Make me not sighted like the basilisk:    I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better    By my regard, but kill'd none so.   Camillo,    As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto    Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns    Our gentry than our parents' noble names,    In whose success we are gentle,   I beseech you,    If you know aught which does behove my knowledge    Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not    In ignorant concealment.
Then, window, let day in and let life out.
As I intend to prosper and repent,    So thrive I in my dangerous affairs    Of hostile arms!   Myself myself confound,    Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours,    Day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest,    Be opposite all planets of good luck    To my proceedings if, with dear hearts love,    Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,    I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter.    In her consists my happiness and thine.    Without her follows to myself and thee,    Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,    Death, desolation, ruin and decay.    It cannot be avoided but by this;    It will not be avoided but by this.    Therefore, dear motherI must call you so    Be the attorney of my love to her:    Plead what I will be, not what I have been;    Not my deserts, but what I will deserve.    Urge the necessity and state of times,    And be not peevish found in great designs.
Youre welcome, sir, and he for your good sake.But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
My lord,
But if she cannot love you, sir?
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you    Here in Verona, ladies of esteem    Are made already mothers.   By my count,    I was your mother much upon these years    That you are now a maid.   Thus then in brief:    The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
Well met, my lord. I am glad to see your Honor.
O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye,Our empress' shame, and stately Rome's disgrace!She is deliver'd, lords; she is deliver'd.
Who shall begin?
He tells her somethingThat makes her blood look out: good sooth, she isThe queen of curds and cream.
Now, pretty one, how long have you been at this trade?
On your attendance, my lord, here.
Faith, Ill home tomorrow, Sir Toby. Your niece will not be seen.   Or if she be, its four to one shell none of me.   The count himself here hard by woos her.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,    Is the immediate jewel of their souls.    Who steals my purse steals trash. 'Tis something, nothing:    'Twas mine, tis his, and has been slave to thousands.    But he that filches from me my good name    Robs me of that which not enriches him    And makes me poor indeed.
O, then my best blood turn    To an infected jelly and my name    Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!    Turn then my freshest reputation to    A savour that may strike the dullest nostril    Where I arrive,   and my approach be shunn'd,    Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection    That e'er was heard or read!
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off youcould have been to him and then your blood had beenthe dearer by I know how much an ounce.
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower    And was embarked to cross to Burgundy,    And in my company my brother Gloucester,    Who from my cabin tempted me to walk    Upon the hatches.   Thence we looked toward England    And cited up a thousand fearful times,    During the wars of York and Lancaster    That had befall'n us.   As we paced along    Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,    Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling    Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard    Into the tumbling billows of the main.    O Lord, methought what pain it was to drown,    What dreadful noise of waters in my ears,    What sights of ugly death within my eyes.    Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks,    Ten thousand men that fishes gnawed upon,    Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,    Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,    All scattered in the bottom of the sea.    Some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes    Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept    as 'twere in scorn of eyes   reflecting gems,    That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep    And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.
Emilia, come.Be as your fancies teach you. Whate'er you be, I am obedient.
A howling monster, a drunken monster.
My lord, prince Pericles is fled.
[within]  Who knocks?
What if I had said I had seen him do you wrong?    Or heard him sayas knaves be such abroad,    Who having, by their own importunate suit,    Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,    Convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose    But they must blab
I see you do not mean to part with her, Or else you like not of my company.
[to PRINCE]  Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign.The weary way hath made you melancholy.
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
O Lord!
Know him? Ay.
Humbly I thank your grace.    Here is the man, this Moor,   whom now it seems,    Your special mandate for the state affairs    Hath hither brought.
My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
Who doth molest my contemplation?    Is it your trick to make me ope the door,    That so my sad decrees may fly away,    And all my study be to no effect?    You are deceived: for what I mean to do    See here in bloody lines I have set down;    And what is written shall be executed.
There, sir, stop.Let us not burden our remembrances withA heaviness thats gone.
O, whither?
Are you a woman?
O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil    That robb'd Andronicus of his good hand;    This is the pearl that pleased your empress' eye,    And here's the base fruit of his burning lust.    Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou convey    This growing image of thy fiend-like face?    Why dost not speak? what, deaf? not a word?    A halter, soldiers! hang him on this tree.    And by his side his fruit of bastardy.
No more, but that you read    These accusations and these grievous crimes    Committed by your person and your followers    Against the state and profit of this land;    That, by confessing them, the souls of men    May deem that you are worthily deposed.
The ship is here put in,    A Veronesa. Michael Cassio,    Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,    Is come on shore. The Moor himself at sea    And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
The more accursed thou, that still omitt'st it.
So please your grace, my ancient.    A man he is of honesty and trust.    To his conveyance I assign my wife,    With what else needful your good grace shall think    To be sent after me.
I thank you. How does lieutenant Cassio?
O, welcome, father!    Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,    Here to unfold   (though lately we intended    To keep in darkness what occasion now    Reveals before tis ripe)   what thou dost know    Hath newly passed between this youth and me.
The good King Simonides, do you call him.
My lord,'Tis done.
Peace, foolish woman.
And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.
My lord protector needs will have it so.
And must she die for this? O, let her live,    And Ill corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,    Slander myself as false to Edwards bed,    Throw over her the veil of infamy.    So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter,    I will confess she was not Edwards daughter.
To be consorted with the humorous night.Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Oh ho, oh ho! Would t had been done!Thou didst prevent me. I had peopled elseThis isle with Calibans.
O, but they say the tongues of dying men    Enforce attention like deep harmony:    Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,    For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.    He that no more must say is listen'd more    Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;    More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before:    The setting sun, and music at the close,    As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,    Writ in remembrance more than things long past:    Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,    My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
To vail the title, as her mother doth.
[Taking JULIETs hand]   If I profane with my unworthiesthand    This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:    My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand    To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Monster, I will kill this man. His daughter and I will be king and queensave our graces!and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo?
Bid her come hither. Go.
And far surmounts our labour to attain it.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
She did deceive her father, marrying you,And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,She loved them most.
Ill claim that promise at your Graces hands.
What says he?
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
I think shell sooner prove a soldier.Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtained,That is, her love, for that is all in all.
What, did they never whisper?
Good time of day unto my gracious lord.
[To LUCENTIO]   O, very well, I have perused the note.    Hark you, sir: Ill have them very fairly bound,    All books of love.   See that at any hand,    And see you read no other lectures to her.    You understand me. Over and beside    Signior Baptistas liberality,    Ill mend it with a largess.   Take your paper too.    And let me have them very well perfumd    For she is sweeter than perfume itself    To whom they go to.   What will you read to her?
[within]  What, ho! My lord, my lord!
Come, cordial and not poison, go with meTo Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.
I will incontinently drown myself.
[To POLIXENES]  Sir, welcome:It is my father's will I should take on meThe hostess-ship o' the day.  [To CAMILLO]  You're welcome, sir.Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,For you there's rosemary and rue; these keepSeeming and savour all the winter long:Grace and remembrance be to you both,And welcome to our shearing!
A burning torch that's turned upside down;The word, 'Quod me alit, me extinguit.'
Tis but thy name that is my enemy.    Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.    Whats Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,    Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part    Belonging to a man.   O, be some other name!    Whats in a name? That which we call a rose    By any other word would smell as sweet.    So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,    Retain that dear perfection which he owes    Without that title.   Romeo, doff thy name,    And for that name, which is no part of thee    Take all myself.
I saw them speak together.
O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!    Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!    Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!    Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!    Would they make peace? terrible hell make war    Upon their spotted souls for this offence!
I drink the air before me, and returnOr ere your pulse twice beat.
Ay, and I thinkOne business does command us all; for mine Is money.
Where, good Mistress Mary?
Here, master. What cheer?
[aside]  Prospero my lord shall know what I have done.So, King, go safely on to seek thy son.
Cambio.
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him    Then forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept    A hellhound that doth hunt us all to death    That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,    To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood;    That excellent grand tyrant of the earth,    That reigns in gallèd eyes of weeping souls;    That foul defacer of Gods handiwork    Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.    O upright, just, and true-disposing God,    How do I thank thee that this carnal cur    Preys on the issue of his mothers body    And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!
'Tis timeI should inform thee farther. Lend thy handAnd pluck my magic garment from me.
I am glad to see you.
And sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.
Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and speak tome. For I am Trinculobe not afeardthy good friend Trinculo.
Mark your divorce, young sir,    [Discovering himself]    Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base    To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir,    That thus affect'st a sheep-hook!   Thou old traitor,    I am sorry that by hanging thee I can    But shorten thy life one week.   And thou, fresh piece    Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know    The royal fool thou copest with,
What, will you not suffer me?   Nay, now I see    She is your treasure, she must have a husband,    I must dance barefoot on her wedding day    And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell.    Talk not to me. I will go sit and weep    Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Hes a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, tis stabbing.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child.    One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,    Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy    That thou expectst not, nor I looked not for.
O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame    To pay this debt of love but to a brother,    How will she love, when the rich golden shaft    Hath killed the flock of all affections else    That live in her, when liver, brain, and heart,    These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filled    Her sweet perfections with one self king!    Away before me to sweet beds of flowers.    Love thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
How close 'tis caulk'd and bitumed!Did the sea cast it up?
Here in your city; I now came from him:    I speak amazedly; and it becomes    My marvel and my message.   To your court    Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,    Of this fair couple, meets he on the way    The father of this seeming lady and    Her brother, having both their country quitted    With this young prince.
Which welcome we'll accept; feast here awhile,Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.
What, you mean my face?
All fortune to the good Simonides!
There is no womans sides    Can bide the beating of so strong a passion    As love doth give my heart.   No womans heart    So big, to hold so much. They lack retention.    Alas, their love may be called appetite,    No motion of the liver, but the palate,    That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt;    But mine is all as hungry as the sea,    And can digest as much.   Make no compare    Between that love a woman can bear me    And that I owe Olivia.
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.
Gentlemen,Why do you stir so early?
Tranio, lets go. One thing more rests, that thyself execute,  To make one among these wooers. If thou ask me why, Sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.
What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast,    Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.    Burn, house! sink, Athens! henceforth hated be    Of Timon man and all humanity!
Then list to me:    This follows, if you will not change your purpose    But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,    And there present yourself and your fair princess,    For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:    She shall be habited as it becomes    The partner of your bed.   Methinks I see    Leontes opening his free arms and weeping    His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness,    As 'twere i' the father's person;   kisses the hands    Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him    'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one    He chides to hell and bids the other grow    Faster than thought or time.
A good lenten answer. I can tell thee where that sayingwas born, of I fear no colors.
Call them again, sweet prince. Accept their suit.If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
[to FERDINAND]  Come on. Obey.Thy nerves are in their infancy againAnd have no vigor in them.
For what?
In his tongue.
'Tis a gentleman here   a plague o' these pickle herring!    How now, sot!
Kill men i' th' dark! Where be these bloody thieves?    How silent is this town!   Ho! murder! murder!    What may you be? Are you of good or evil?
A dry jest, sir.
Have I thought long to see this mornings face,And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Dorset, embrace him.Hastings, love Lord Marquess.
Ay, but I know
Lord governor, for so we hear you are,    Let not our ships and number of our men    Be like a beacon fired to amaze your eyes.    We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,    And seen the desolation of your streets:    Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,    But to relieve them of their heavy load;    And these our ships, you happily may think    Are like the Trojan horse was stuff'd within    With bloody veins, expecting overthrow,    Are stored with corn to make your needy bread,    And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.
It is a quarrel most unnatural To be revenged on him that loveth thee.
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, Ill answer him by law.Ill not budge an inch, boy. Let him come, and kindly.
Oh, they are our friends. But one cup. Ill drink for you.
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.    Thou saidstOh, it comes o'er my memory,    As doth the raven o'er the infectious house,    Boding to allhe had my handkerchief.
And, as we walk along, I dare be boldWith our discourse to make your grace to smile.What think you of this page, my lord?
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Nowart thou sociable. Now art thou Romeo.   Now art thou what thou artby art as well as by nature, for this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lollingup and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
We two, my lord,Will guard your person while you take your restAnd watch your safety.
Ay, with a twink.
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast    That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old.    'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.    Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
But for a satisfaction of my thought,No further harm.
'Tis true. Theres magic in the web of it.    A sibyl, that had numbered in the world    The sun to course two hundred compasses,    In her prophetic fury sewed the work.    The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk,    And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful    Conserved of maidens' hearts.
Ha?
Ay, boy, ready.
I may command where I adore. Why, she may command me.I serve her, she is my lady. Why, this is evident to any formal capacity. There is no obstruction in this. And the endwhat should that alphabetical position portend? If I could make that resemble something in meSoftly! M.O.A.I.
I am, and by my fancy: if my reasonWill thereto be obedient, I have reason;If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,Do bid it welcome.
Is t possible you will away tonight?
Tomorrow, sir. Best first go see your lodging.
Commend me to them,    And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,    Their fears of hostile strokes,   their aches, losses,    Their pangs of love, with other incident throes    That nature's fragile vessel doth sustain    In life's uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them:    I'll teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades' wrath.
And may, but how? How satisfied, my lord? Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,Behold her topped?
That Thaisa am I, supposed deadAnd drown'd.
Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself.    If she and I be pleased, whats that to you?    'Tis bargained twixt us twain, being alone,    That she shall still be curst in company.    I tell you, tis incredible to believe    How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate!    She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss    She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,    That in a twink she won me to her love.    O, you are novices! 'Tis a world to see,    How tame, when men and women are alone,    A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.    Give me thy hand, Kate. I will unto Venice    To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding day.    Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests.    I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.
Gentlewoman, my lady calls.
My husband, then?
Of much less value is my companyThan your good words. But who comes here?
What, must our mouths be cold?
Theres many a beast then in a populous city,And many a civil monster.
I have not seen you long: how goes the world?
Are you in earnest, sir?  [Aside]  I smell the trick on't.
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,    For how I firmly am resolved you know    That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter    Before I have a husband for the elder.  If either of you both love Katherina,Because I know you well and love you wellLeave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
Would poison were obedient and knew my mind!
How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?
I pray you do.
My lord, there are certain nobles of the senateNewly alighted, and come to visit you.
Even now, sir. On a moderate pace I have since arrived but hither.
By such despair I should accuse myself.
[aside]  That will not be in haste.
Marcus, we will.
Damn her, lewd minx! Oh, damn her, damn her!    Come, go with me apart.   I will withdraw    To furnish me with some swift means of death    For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
[as LITIO]  Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,You that durst swear that your mistress BiancaLoved none in the world so well as Lucentio.
Well, God give them wisdom that have it. And those thatare fools, let them use their talents.
My gentleman, Cesario?
I thinkYou'll turn a child again.
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,    It cannot countervail the exchange of joy    That one short minute gives me in her sight.    Do thou but close our hands with holy words,    Then love-devouring death do what he dare;    It is enough I may but call her mine.
A gentleman? What gentleman?
An I thought that, Id forswear it. Ill ride home tomorrow,Sir Toby.
My duty, madam, and most humble service.
Go, hang yourselves all! You are idle, shallow things. I am not of your element. You shall know more hereafter.
Comfort, good comfort!   We must to the king and show    our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your    daughter nor my sister; we are gone else.   Sir, I    will give you as much as this old man does when the    business is performed, and remain, as he says, your    pawn till it be brought you.
Here, noble lord. What is thy will with her?
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by    circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you    see, there is such unity in the proofs.   The mantle    of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it,    the letters of Antigonus found with it which they    know to be his character, the majesty of the    creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection    of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding,    and many other evidences proclaim her with all    certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see    the meeting of the two kings?
[as LITIO  , to  LUCENTIO]  You may go walk, and give me leave awhile.My lessons make no music in three parts.
Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments.Lay forth the gown.
The handkerchief!
Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a foolish knight
[as LUCENTIO]  What said the wench when he rose again?
Art thou gone so, love, lord? Ay, husband, friend,    I must hear from thee every day in the hour,    For in a minute there are many days.    Oh, by this count I shall be much in years    Ere I again behold my Romeo.
Your master will be dead ere you return;There's nothing can be minister'd to natureThat can recover him.  [TO PHILEMON]  Give this to the 'pothecary,And tell me how it works.
No, sir, the worse.
His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!    But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,    Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm;    We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,    And yet we strike not, but securely perish.
I rememberYou did supplant your brother Prospero.
It hath not appeared.
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Yes.
Who is thy lord?
What, are they dead?
I have nights cloak to hide me from their eyes,    And but thou love me, let them find me here.    My life were better ended by their hate    Than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.
I will be free from thee.
Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king    Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.    The means that heaven yields must be embraced,    And not neglected;   else, if heaven would,    And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,    The proffer'd means of succor and redress.
Do so, and after two daysI will discharge thee.
(  sings  )  Sir Toby, there you lie.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
And you, good sir. Pray, have you not a daughterCalled Katherina, fair and virtuous?
Woe to the land thats governed by a child.
The spirit torments me. Oh!
I have it not about me.
Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
No, madam, he does nothing but smile. Your ladyship were best to have some guard about you if he come, for sure the man is tainted in s wits.
Wherefore?
Say thou wilt course. Thy greyhounds are as swiftAs breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
And Ill still stay, to have thee still forget,Forgetting any other home but this.
I thank you, madam, that you tender her.Poor gentlewoman! My master wrongs her much.
So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again,    Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius:    All, sirrah, all:    I'll once more feast the rascals.
Neither.
My lord, we always have confess'd it.
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs and weeps.We took this mattock and this spade from him As he was coming from this churchyards side.
'Tis in grain, sir. 'Twill endure wind and weather.
And were the king on t, what would I do?
This gentleman, the Princes near ally,    My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt    In my behalf. My reputation stained    With Tybalts slander.   Tybalt, that an hour    Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,    Thy beauty hath made me effeminate    And in my temper softened valors steel!
Madman, thou errest.   I say, there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in their fog.
[to QUEEN ELIZABETH]  Poor Clarence did forsake his father Warwick,Ay, and forswore himselfwhich Jesu pardon!
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh    and blood has not offended the king; and so your    flesh and blood is not to be punished by him.   Show    those things you found about her, those secret    things, all but what she has with her:   this being    done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,    With tears augmenting the fresh mornings dew,    Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.    But all so soon as the all-cheering sun    Should in the farthest east begin to draw    The shady curtains from Auroras bed,    Away from light steals home my heavy son,    And private in his chamber pens himself,    Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,    And makes himself an artificial night.    Black and portentous must this humor prove    Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place tothe devil wrath. One unperfectness shows me another, tomake me frankly despise myself.
There lies that Tybalt.
Do, Paulina;For this affliction has a taste as sweetAs any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,There is an air comes from her: what fine chiselCould ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,For I will kiss her.
I was directed hither: men reportThou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.
Inter their bodies as becomes their births.    Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled    That in submission will return to us.    And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,    We will unite the white rose and the red.    Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,    That long have frowned upon their enmity.    What traitor hears me and says not Amen?    England hath long been mad and scarred herself.    The brother blindly shed the brothers blood.    The father rashly slaughtered his own son.    The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire.    All this divided York and Lancaster,    Divided, in their dire division.    O, now let Richmond and Elizabeth,    The true succeeders of each royal house,    By Gods fair ordinance conjoin together,    And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so,    Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,    With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days!    Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,    That would reduce these bloody days again,    And make poor England weep in streams of blood!    Let them not live to taste this lands increase,    That would with treason wound this fair lands peace.    Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again.    That she may long live here, God say amen.
You may have very fit occasion for t. He is now in some commerce with my lady and will by and by depart.
I pray you, be content, tis but his humor. The business of the state does him offence,And he does chide with you.
It doth so, holy sir, and theres my master,One that you love.
Here, my lord.
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,    As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.    O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,    Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,    And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.    Look how thy servants do attend on thee,    Each in his office ready at thy beck.    Wilt thou have music? Hark! Apollo plays,
A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!
Of thirty sail. And now they do re-stem    Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance    Their purposes toward Cyprus.   Signior Montano,    Your trusty and most valiant servitor,    With his free duty recommends you thus,    And prays you to believe him.
But thine doth fry.Skipper, stand back. 'Tis age that nourisheth.
Faith, nothing; but 'has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
Hark, they roar.
That's enough.
Who? Camillo?
I may not, verily.
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,    As doth the blushing discontented sun    From out the fiery portal of the east,    When he perceives the envious clouds are bent    To dim his glory and to stain the track    Of his bright passage to the occident.
Go, fellow, go. Return unto thy lord.    Bid him not fear the separated council.    His Honor and myself are at the one,    And at the other is my good friend Catesby,    Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us    Whereof I shall not have intelligence.    Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance.    And for his dreams, I wonder hes so simple    To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.    To fly the boar before the boar pursues    Were to incense the boar to follow us    And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.    Go, bid thy master rise and come to me,    And we will both together to the Tower,    Where he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
Prithee, no more.
The mighty dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.
I am their fathers mother. I will see them.
You taught me language, and my profit on t    Is I know how to curse.   The red plague rid you    For learning me your language!
Here, madam:  Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus,    Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
I know his gait, tis he.Villain, thou diest!
Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceiveLord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
Strike up the drum towards Athens! Farewell, Timon:If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.
The trumpet sounds. Be copious in exclaims.
Twenty-three days    They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells    The great Apollo suddenly will have    The truth of this appear.   Prepare you, lords;    Summon a session, that we may arraign    Our most disloyal lady,   for, as she hath    Been publicly accused, so shall she have    A just and open trial.   While she lives    My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,    And think upon my bidding.
I say it is the moon.
Well, go to. Very well.
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.
Touch not the boy; he is of royal blood.
It is requiredYou do awake your faith. Then all stand still;On: those that think it is unlawful businessI am about, let them depart.
My fan, Peter.
As you think meet. Most wretched queen!
We shall have a rare letter from him: but youll not deliver t?
Most villanously, like a pedant that keeps a school i' the church.   I have dogged him, like his murderer. He does obey every point of the letter that I dropped to betray him.   He does smile his face into more lines than is in the new map with the augmentation of the Indies.    You have not seen such a thing as tis. I can hardly forbear hurling things at him.   I know my lady will strike him. If she do, hell smile and take t for a great favor.
I should know that voice. It should beBut he is drowned, and these are devils. Oh, defend me!
To see his nobleness!    Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,    He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,    Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,    Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,    And downright languish'd.   Leave me solely: go,    See how he fares.    [Exit Servant]    Fie, fie! no thought of him:    The thought of my revenges that way    Recoil upon me:   in himself too mighty,    And in his parties, his alliance; let him be    Until a time may serve:   for present vengeance,    Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes    Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:    They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor    Shall she within my power.
I would most gladly know the issue of it.
How do you, gentlemen?
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing.They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
Yes, mine's three thousand crowns: what's yours?
How long hath he been there?
And twenty cagèd nightingales do sing:    Or wilt thou sleep?   Well have thee to a couch    Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed    On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis.    Say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground.    Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapped,    Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.    Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar    Above the morning lark.   Or wilt thou hunt?    Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them    And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
But of all, the burstAnd the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my senseThat I was nothing.
The motions good indeed and be it so.Petruchio, I shall be your  ben venuto.
Little.
Ah, mocker, thats the dogs name. R is for theNo, I know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:    And yet salt water blinds them not so much    But they can see a sort of traitors here.    Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,    I find myself a traitor with the rest;    For I have given here my soul's consent    To undeck the pompous body of a king;    Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,    Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
Sir,This is the man that can, in aught you would,Resolve you.
Is the chair empty? Is the sword unswayed?    Is the king dead, the empire unpossessed?    What heir of York is there alive but we?    And who is Englands king but great Yorks heir?    Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?
[to OTHELLO]  What, in your own part, can you say to this?
All things in common nature should produce    Without sweat or endeavor.   Treason, felony,    Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,    Would I not have.   But nature should bring forth    Of its own kind all foison, all abundance,    To feed my innocent people.
Oh, villain!
[as CAMBIO]  All but the base.
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them, But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
(  disguising his voice   )  What ho, I say! Peace in this prison!
[to FERDINAND]     What is this maid with whom thou wast at play?    Your eldst acquaintance cannot be three hours.    Is she the goddess that hath severed us    And brought us thus together?
Thou wilt amend thy life?
Is't true? can't be?
Today, my lord, and for three months before, No interim, not a minutes vacancy,Both day and night did we keep company.
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. Come, be a man. Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind puppies! I have professed me thy friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness. I could never better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse.   Follow thou the wars,defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. I say, put money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue her love to the Moorput money in thy pursenor he his to her.   It was a violent commencement in her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestrationput but money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their willsfill thy purse with money.   The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida. She must change for youth. When she is sated with his body she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put money in thy purse.   If thou wiltneeds damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits and allthe tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her.   Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself! 'Tis clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be hanged in compassingthy joy than to be drowned and go without her.
What were I best to say? Her fathers brother    Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle?    Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?    Under what title shall I woo for thee,    That God, the law, my honor and her love    Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
This evening coming.
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your    beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office    than to be beadle.   But, master, I'll go draw up the    net.
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or Ill cry a match.
Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?
Thy grace shall have it.
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;    I needs must think it honesty.   Camillo,    Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may    Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or    The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides    In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath    To this my fair beloved:   therefore, I pray you,    As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,    When he shall miss me,as, in faith, I mean not    To see him any more,   cast your good counsels    Upon his passion;   let myself and fortune    Tug for the time to come.   This you may know    And so deliver, I am put to sea    With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;    And most opportune to our need I have    A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared    For this design.   What course I mean to hold    Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor    Concern me the reporting.
I pity you.
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,    which is in the keeping of Paulina,   a piece many    years in doing and now newly performed by that rare    Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself    eternity and could put breath into his work, would    beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her    ape:   he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that    they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of    answer: thither with all greediness of affection    are they gone, and there they intend to sup.
Prithee, no more. Thou dost talk nothing to me.
As willingly as e'er I came from school.
A sad tale's best for winter: I have oneOf sprites and goblins.
Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.
It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune,And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobsThat he would labor my delivery.
Know that our griefs are risen to the top,And now at length they overflow their banks.
The countess Richmond, good my lord of Derby,    To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.    Yet, Derby, notwithstanding shes your wife    And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured    I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
No, my good lord. My friends are in the north.
I pray you sir, go forthAnd give us truth who tis that is arrived.
Sad, lady! I could be sad. This does make some obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering, but whatof that?   If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true sonnet is, Please one, and please all.
Marry sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But,masters, heres money for you, and the general so likesyour music that he desires you, for loves sake, to make no more noise with it.
There is no leprosy but what thou speak'st.
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,    The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,    The County Paris, at Saint Peters Church,    Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
[seeing ALONSO and kneeling]  Though the seas threaten, they are merciful.I have cursed them without cause.
Villains, set down the corse or, by Saint Paul,Ill make a corse of him that disobeys.
No, not much moved. I do not think but Desdemonas honest.
Do not you hear a cry?
No noise, my lord; but needful conferenceAbout some gossips for your highness.
Why, my sweet lord?
Zounds, tis even now at my elbow, persuading me not tokill the duke.
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes tothe tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there'sscarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis inrequest, I can tell you.
You shall not write my praise.
Why, uncle, what's the matter?
How do you mean, removing of him?
Aside, aside; here comes Lord Timon.
Nay, Ill ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains.I will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.
O my good lord,    At many times I brought in my accounts,    Laid them before you; you would throw them off,    And say, you found them in mine honesty.    When, for some trifling present, you have bid me    Return so much, I have shook my head and wept;    Yea, 'gainst the authority of manners, pray'd you    To hold your hand more close:   I did endure    Not seldom, nor no slight cheques, when I have    Prompted you in the ebb of your estate    And your great flow of debts.   My loved lord,    Though you hear now, too lateyet now's a time    The greatest of your having lacks a half    To pay your present debts.
I know not; butHere is the regent, sir, of MytileneSpeaks nobly of her.
I warrant you.
And what said the gallant?
Like a bold champion, I assume the lists,    Nor ask advice of any other thought    But faithfulness and courage.    I am no viper, yet I feed    On mother's flesh which did me breed.    I sought a husband, in which labour    I found that kindness in a father:    He's father, son, and husband mild;    I mother, wife, and yet his child.    How they may be, and yet in two,    As you will live, resolve it you.    Sharp physic is the last: but, O you powers    That give heaven countless eyes to view men's acts,    Why cloud they not their sights perpetually,    If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?    Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still,    Were not this glorious casket stored with ill:    But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt    For he's no man on whom perfections wait    That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate.    You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings;    Who, finger'd to make man his lawful music,    Would draw heaven down, and all the gods, to hearken:    But being play'd upon before your time,    Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime.    Good sooth, I care not for you.
[as VINCENTIO]  Help, son! Help, Signior Baptista!
Yes, Caliban, her son.
No, madam, I do but read madness. An your ladyship willhave it as it ought to be, you must allow  vox.
Arise, I pray you, rise:We do not look for reverence, but to love,And harbourage for ourself, our ships, and men.
We have no reason to desire it,    Commended to our master, not to us:    Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire,    As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.
Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so.
But pearls are fair; and the old saying is,Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
Hic ibat    , as I told you before,    Simois    , I am Lucentio,    hic est    , son unto Vincentio of Pisa,      Sigeia tellus    , disguised thus to get your love,    Hic steterat    , and that Lucentio that comes a-wooing,    Priami    is my man Tranio,    regia    , bearing my port,    celsa senis,    that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in ourway!
Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee. Thy eyes are almost set in thy head.
I cry thee mercy.    There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.     [he gives money]     Hath any well-advisèd friend proclaimed    Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
And then?
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Why then, by God.
Whats he that now is going out of door?
Excellent well!
I have inly wept,    Or should have spoke ere this.   Look down, you gods,    And on this couple drop a blessèd crown,    For it is you that have chalked forth the way    Which brought us hither.
[Opens the door]  Welcome then.
He found it then,I never gave it him. Send for him hither,Let him confess a truth.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Can you do it?
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Here at the door. I pray you call them in.
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
I will confess to you that I love him.
Heres such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?
O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night To hear good counsel. Oh, what learning is!My lord, Ill tell my lady you will come.
No, Cassio is not killed.
Good even, Varro: what,You come for money?
Live, and love thy misery.
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread. I said a gown.
Pretty.What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
[to PRINCE]    My lord, will t please you pass along?    Myself and my good cousin Buckingham    Will to your mother, to entreat of her    To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
But believe you this, my lord, that, not long ago,    one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow    so many talents,   nay, urged extremely for't and    showed what necessity belonged to't, and yet was denied.
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; theking's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder isbroken out within this hour that ballad-makerscannot be able to express it.  [Enter a third gentleman]  Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he candeliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this newswhich is called true is so like an old tale, thatthe verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the kingfound his heir?
Nay then, I will not. You shall have the mustardOr else you get no beef of Grumio.
My lord?
Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,Out at the postern by the abbey-wall:I fear I am attended by some spies.
Sir, spare your threats:    The bug which you would fright me with I seek.    To me can life be no commodity:    The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,    I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,    But know not how it went.   My second joy    And first-fruits of my body, from his presence    I am barr'd, like one infectious.   My third comfort    Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast,    The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,    Haled out to murder:   myself on every post    Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred    The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs    To women of all fashion;   l   astly, hurried    Here to this place, i' the open air, before    I have got strength of limit.   Now, my liege,    Tell me what blessings I have here alive,    That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.    But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,    I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,    Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd    Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else    But what your jealousies awake, I tell you    'Tis rigor and not law.   Your honours all,    I do refer me to the oracle:    Apollo be my judge!
And he, and more    Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:    That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,    Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth    That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge    More than was ever man's, I would not prize them    Without her love;   for her employ them all;    Commend them and condemn them to her service    Or to their own perdition.
Weeping and wailing over Tybalts corse. Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
[reads]        Gamut    I am, the ground of all accord:     A re,    to plead Hortensios passion;     B mi,    Bianca, take him for thy lord,     C fa ut,    that loves with all affection;     D sol re,    one clef, two notes have I;     E la mi,    show pity, or I die.    Call you this gamut? Tut, I like it not.    Old fashions please me best.   I am not so nice    To change true rules for old inventions.
Why dost thou seek me out?
There is no other way. 'Tis she must do t,And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.    Lets see for means. O mischief, thou art swift    To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!    I do remember an apothecary    And hereabouts he dwellswhich late I noted    In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,    Culling of simples.   Meager were his looks,    Sharp misery had worn him to the bones,    And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,    An alligator stuffed, and other skins    Of ill-shaped fishes;   and about his shelves    A beggarly account of empty boxes,    Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,    Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,    Were thinly scattered to make up a show.    Noting this penury, to myself I said,    An if a man did need a poison now    Whose sale is present death in Mantua    Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.    Oh, this same thought did but forerun my need,    And this same needy man must sell it me.    As I remember, this should be the house.    Being holiday, the beggars shop is shut.    What, ho! Apothecary!
[as LUCENTIO]  But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
I pray you, upon what?
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you    To pardon me yet for a night or two,    Or if not so, until the sun be set.    For your physicians have expressly charged,    In peril to incur your former malady,    That I should yet absent me from your bed.    I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
What men of name are slain on either side?
How! gone!
Where were you bred?And how achieved you these endowments, whichYou make more rich to owe?
Ay, let her rot and perish and be damned tonight, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turned to stone. I strike it and it hurts my hand.   Oh, the world hath not asweeter creature, she might lie by an emperors side and command him tasks.
But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.If his occasion were not virtuous,I should not urge it half so faithfully.
What will you give us?
So, slave, hence!
I say, amen, Gonzalo.
Nor none that live, I hope.
Soft, he wakes.
Now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
Good morrow, neighbor Baptista.
Adieu, poor soul that takst thy leave of it.
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
Hold thy peace:    He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring    Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:    The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,    That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,    Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke,    I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
He seems to be a stranger; but his present isA wither'd branch, that's only green at top;The motto, 'In hac spe vivo.'
Master Malvolio?
Happily met, the happier for thy son.    And now by law as well as reverend age,    I may entitle thee my loving father.    The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,    Thy son by this hath married.   Wonder not    Nor be grieved. She is of good esteem,    Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth.    Beside, so qualified as may beseem    The spouse of any noble gentleman.    Let me embrace with old Vincentio,    And wander we to see thy honest son,    Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
Would we were all discharged!
Dear, look up:    Though Fortune, visible an enemy,    Should chase us with my father, power no jot    Hath she to change our loves.   Beseech you, sir,    Remember since you owed no more to time    Than I do now: with thought of such affections,    Step forth mine advocate; at your request    My father will grant precious things as trifles.
[aside]  I have seen them in the church together. God send'em good shipping! But who is here? Mine old masterVincentio! Now we are undone and brought to nothing.
Oh, villain that I am!
True, I talk of dreams,    Which are the children of an idle brain,    Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,    Which is as thin of substance as the air    And more inconstant than the wind, who woos    Even now the frozen bosom of the north,    And, being angered, puffs away from thence,    Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
God and our innocence defend and guard us!
By nothing, for this is no oath.    Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor;    Thy garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue;    Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory.    If something thou wouldst swear to be believed,    Swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.
We cannot but obey    The powers above us.   Could I rage and roar    As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end    Must be as 'tis.   My gentle babe Marina, whom,    For she was born at sea, I have named so, here    I charge your charity withal, leaving her    The infant of your care;   beseeching you    To give her princely training, that she may be    Manner'd as she is born.
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeos man,With instruments upon them fit to open These dead mens tombs.
O, let me look!    If he be none of mine, my sanctity    Will to my sense bend no licentious ear,    But curb it, spite of seeing.   O, my lord,    Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake,    Like him you are: did you not name a tempest,    A birth, and death?
Oh,    If you but knew how you the purpose cherish    Whiles thus you mock it! How, in stripping it,    You more invest it!   Ebbing men indeed    Most often do so near the bottom run    By their own fear or sloth.
